<h1>The Essays</h1>
<h2>Or, Moral, Political, and Military Discourses</h2>
<h3>of Lord Michael de Montaigne,</h3>
<h4>Knight of the noble Order of Saint Michael, and one of the Gentlemen in Ordinary of the French Kings Chamber</h4>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>The Author to the Reader</h2>
<p>Reader, behold here a well-meaning book. It does at the first entrance forewarn you, that in contriving the same I have proposed unto myself no other than a familiar and private end. I have no respect or consideration at all, either to your service, or to my glory; my forces are not capable of any such design. I have vowed the same to the particular commodity of my kinsfolk and friends, to the end that losing me (which they are likely to do ere long) they may therein find some lineaments of my conditions and humors, and by that means reserve more whole, and more-lively foster, the knowledge and acquaintance they have had of me. Had my intention been to forestall and purchase the world’s opinion and favor, I would surely have adorned myself more quaintly, or kept a more grave and solemn march. I desire therein to be delineated in my own genuine, simple, and ordinary fashion, without contention, art, or study—for it is myself I portray. My imperfections shall therein be read to the life, and my natural form discerned, so far as public reverence has permitted me. For if my fortune had been to have lived among those nations which yet are said to live under the sweet liberty of Nature’s first and uncorrupted laws, I assure you I would most willingly have portrayed myself fully and naked. Thus, gentle Reader, myself am the groundwork of my book: it is then no reason you should employ your time about so frivolous and vain a subject. Therefore farewell, From Montaigne, the first of March, 1580.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter I:<br />By diverse means men come to a like end.</h2>
<p>The most usual way to appease those minds we have offended (when revenge lies in their hands and we stand at their mercy) is, by submission, to move them to commiseration and pity. Nevertheless, courage, constancy, and resolution (means altogether opposite) have sometimes wrought the same effect. Edward the black Prince of Wales (who so long governed our country of Guyenne, a man whose conditions and fortune were accompanied with many notable parts of worth and magnanimity) having been grievously offended by the Limosins, though he by main force took and entered their city, could by no means be appeased, nor by the wailful outcries of all sorts of people (as of men, women, and children) be moved to any pity, they prostrating themselves to the common slaughter, crying for mercy, and humbly submitting themselves at his feet, until such time as, in triumphant manner passing through their city, he perceived three French gentlemen, who alone, with an incredible and undaunted boldness, gainstood the enraged violence and made head against the fury of his victorious army. The consideration and respect of so notable a virtue did first abate the dint of his wrath, and from those three he began to relent, and to show mercy to all the other inhabitants of the said town. Skanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, following one of his soldiers with purpose to kill him, who by all means of humility and submissive entreaty had first offered to pacify him, in such an unavoidable extremity resolved at last resolutely to encounter him with his sword in his hand. This resolution did immediately stay his captain’s fury, who seeing him undertake so honorable an attempt, not only forgave, but received him into grace and favor. This example may perhaps, of such as have not known the prodigious force and matchless valor of the said Prince, admit another interpretation.</p>
<p>The Emperor Conrad, third of that name, having besieged Welf, Duke of Bavaria, whatever vile or base satisfaction was offered him, would yield to no other milder conditions, but only to suffer such gentlewomen as were with the Duke in the city (their honors safe) to issue out of the town afoot, with such things as they could carry about them. They with an unrelenting courage advised and resolved themselves (neglecting all other riches or jewels) to carry their husbands, their children, and the Duke himself, on their backs. The Emperor perceiving the quaintness of their device, took so great pleasure at it that he wept for joy, and forthwith converted that former inexorable rage and mortal hatred he bare the Duke, into so mild a relenting and gentle kindness, that thenceforward he entreated both him and his with all favor and courtesy.</p>
<p>Either of these ways might easily persuade me: for I am much inclined to mercy, and affected to mildness. So it is, that in my opinion, I should more naturally stoop unto compassion, than bend to estimation. Yet is pity held a vicious passion among the Stoics. They would have us aid the afflicted, but not to faint and co-suffer with them. These examples seem fittest for me, forasmuch as these minds are seen to be assaulted and environed by these two means, in undauntedly suffering the one, and stooping under the other. It may perhaps be said that to yield ones heart unto commiseration is an effect of facility, tenderness, and meekness: whence it proceedes, that the weakest natures, as of women, children, and the vulgar sort are more subject unto it. But (having contemned tears and wailings) to yield unto the only reverence of the sacred image of virtue is the effect of a couragious and employable mind, holding a masculine and contant vigor in honor and affection. Notwithstanding, amazement and admiration may in less generous minds work the like effect. Witness the Thebans, who having accused and indicted their captains, as of a capital crime, forasmuch as they had continued their charge beyond the time prescribed them, absolved and acquitted Pelopidas of all punishment, because he submissively yielded under the burden of such objections, and to save himself, employed no other means but suing requests and demiss entreaties; where on the contrary, Epaminondas boldly relating the exploits achieved by him, and with a fierce and arrogant manner upbraiding the people with them, had not the heart so much as to take their lots into his hands, but went his way, and was freely absolved; the assembly much commending the stoutness of his courage.</p>
<p>Dionysius the elder, after extreme difficulties, having taken the city of Rhegium, and in it the Captain Phyton (a worthy honest man) who had so obstinately defended the same, would show a tragical example of revenge. First, he told him how the day before he had caused his son and all his kinsfolk to be drowned. To whom Phyton, stoutly out-staring him, answered nothing but that they were more happy than himself by the space of one day. Afterward he caused him to be stripped, and by his executioners to be taken and dragged through the city most ignominiously, whipping him, charging him besides with contumelious speeches. All which notwithstanding, as one no whit dismayed, he ever showed a constant and resolute heart, and with a cheerful and bold countenance went on still, loudly recounting the honorable and glorious cause of his death, which was that he would never consent to yield his country into the hands of a cruel tyrant, menacing him with an imminent punishment of the Gods. Dionysius plainly reading in his soldiers looks, that in lieu of animating them with braving his conquered enemy, they in contempt of him, and scorn of his triumph, seemed by the astonishment of so rare a virtue, to be moved with compassion, and inclined to mutiny, indeed, and to free Phyton from out of the hands of his sergeants or guard, caused his torture to cease, and secretly sent him to be drowned in the sea.</p>
<p>Surely, man is a wonderful, vain, diverse, and wavering subject: it is very hard to ground any directly-constant and uniform judgement upon him. Behold Pompey, who freely pardoned all the city of the Mamertines (against which he was grievously enraged) for the love of the magnanimity and consideration of the exceeding virtue of Zeno, one of their fellow-citizens, who took the public fault wholly upon himself and desired no other favor, but alone to bear the punishment thereof; whereas Sylla’s host having used the like virtue in the city of Perugia, obtained nothing, neither for himself nor for others. And directly against my first example, the hardiest amongst men, and so gracious to the vanquished, Alexander the Great, after many strange difficulties forcing the city of Gaza, encountered by chance with Betis, that commanded therein, of whose valor (during the siege) he had felt wonderful and strange exploits, being then alone, forsaken of all his followers, his arms all broken, all besmeared with blood and wounds, fighting amongst a number of Macedonians, who pell-mell laid still upon him; provoked by so dear a victory (for among other mishaps he had newly received two hurts in his body) said this unto him: Betis, you shall not die as you would, for make account you must endure all the torments may possibly be devised or inflicted upon a captive wretch, as you are. But he, for all his enemy’s threats, without speaking one word, returned only an assured, stern, and disdainful countenance upon him; which silent obstinacy Alexander noting, said thus unto himself: What? would he not bend his knee? could he not utter one suppliant voice? I will assuredly vanquish his silence, and if I can not wrest a word from him, I will at least make him to sob or groan. And converting his anger into rage, commanded his heels to be pierced through, and so all alive with a cord through them, to be torn, mangled, and dismembered at a cart’s tail. May it be, the force of his courage, was so natural and peculiar unto him, that because he would no whit admire him, he respected him the less? or deemed he it so proper unto himself, that in his height he could not, without the spigot of envious passion, endure to see it in another? or was the natural violence of his rage incapable of any opposition? Surely, had it received any restraint, it may be supposed that, in the ransacking and desolation of the city of Thebes, it should have felt the same; in seeing so many worthies lost, and valiant men put to the sword, as having no means of public defense; for above six thousand were slain and massacred, of which not one was seen either to run away or beg for grace. But on the contrary, some here and there seeking to affront, and endeavoring to check their victorious enemies, urging and provoking them to force them die an honorable death. Not one was seen to yield, and that to his last gasp did not attempt to revenge himself, and with all weapons of despair, with the death of some enemy comfort and sweeten his own misery. Yet could not the affliction of their virtue find any ruth or pity, nor might one day suffice to glut or assuage his revengeful wrath. This butcherous slaughter continued unto the last drop of any remaining blood; where none were spared but the unarmed and naked, the aged and impotent, the women and children; that so from amongst them, they might get thirty thousand slaves.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter II:<br />Of sadness or sorrow</h2>
<p>
No man is more free from this passion than I, for I neither love nor regard it: albeit the world has undertaken, as it were upon covenant, to grace it with a particular favor. Therewith they adorn age, virtue, and conscience. Oh foolish and base ornament! The Italians have more properly with its name entitled malignity: for it is a quality ever hurtful, ever sottish, and as ever base and coward. The Stoics inhibit their elders and sages to be therewith tainted, or have any feeling of it.</p>
<p>But the story says that Psammetichus, king of Egypt, having been defeated and taken by Cambyses king of Persia, seeing his own daughter pass before him in base and vile array, being sent to draw water from a well, his friends weeping and wailing about him (he, with his eyes fixed on the ground, could not be moved to utter one word), and shortly after beholding his son led to execution, held still the same undaunted countenance. But perceiving a familiar friend of his hauled amongst the captives, he began to beat his head, and burst forth into extreme sorrow.</p>
<p>This might well be compared to that which one of our Princes was lately seen to do, who being at Trent, and receiving news of his elder brother’s death—but such a brother as on him lay all the burden and honor of his house—and shortly after tidings of his younger brother’s decease, who was his second hope—and having with an unmatched countenance and exemplar constancy endured these two affronts, it fortuned not long after, that one of his servants dying, he by this latter accident suffered himself to be so far transported, that quitting and forgetting his former resolution, he so abandoned himself to all manner of sorrow and grief, that some argued, only this last mischance had touched him to the quick. But truly the reason was that being otherwise full, and over-plunged in sorrow, the least surcharge broke the bounds and bars of patience.</p>
<p>The like might (I say) be judged of our story, were it not that it follows that Cambyses enquiring of Psammetichus why, when he was not distempered at the misfortune of his son and daughter, he did so impatiently bear the disaster of his friend: “It is,” answered he, “because this last displeasure may be manifested by weeping whereas the two former exceed by much all means and compass to be expressed by tears.”</p>
<p>The invention of that ancient painter might happily fit this purpose, who in <i>The Sacrifice of Iphigenia</i>, being to represent the grief of the by-standers according to the quality and interest each one bare for the death of so fair, so young, and innocent a lady, having ransacked the utmost skill and effects of his art, when he came to the virgin’s father, as if no countenance were able to represent that degree of sorrow, he drew him with a veil over his face. And that is the reason why our poets feign miserable Niobe, who first having lost seven sons and immediately as many daughters, as one over-burdened with their losses, to have been transformed into a stone;</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la">Diriguisse malis:</i><br />
 ―Ovid, <i>Metamorphoses 1</i>, book 6, 303.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>And grew as hard as stone,</span><br />
 <span>But misery and moan.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Thereby to express this mournful, silent stupidity, which so does pierce us when accidents surpassing our strength overwhelm us. Verily the violence of a grief, being extreme, must astound the mind and hinder the liberty of her actions. As it happens at the sudden alarm of some bad tidings, when we shall feel ourselves surprised, benumbed, and as it were deprived of all motion, so that the soul, bursting afterward forth into tears and complaints, seems at more ease and liberty to loose, to clear, and dilate itself.</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la">Et via vix tandem voci laxata dolore est,</i><br />
 ―Virgiil <i>Ænid 1</i>, book 11, 151.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>And scarce at last for speech,</span></br>
 <span>By grief was made a breach.</span>
</blockquote>
<p>In the wars which king Ferdinand made against the widow of John, king of Hungary, about Buda, a man at arms was particularly noted of all men, as in a certain skirmish he had shown exceeding prowess of his body, and, though unknown, being slain, was highly commended and much bemoaned of all; but yet of none so greatly as of a German lord, called Raisciac, as he that was amazed at so rare virtue. His body being recovered and had off, this Lord, led by a common curiosity, drew near unto it to see who it might be, and having caused him to be disarmed, perceived him to be his own son, which known, did greatly augment the compassion of all the camp. He only, without framing word or closing his eyes, but earnestly viewing the dead body of his son, stood still up upright, till the vehemence of his sad sorrow, having suppressed and choked his vital spirits, felled him stark dead to the ground.</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="it">Chi puo dir com’ egli arde è in picciol fuoco,</i><br />
 ―Petrarch <abbr>p.</abbr> 1, Sonnet 140.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>He that can say how he does fry,</span><br />
 <span>In petty-gentle flames does lie,</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>
 say those Lovers that would lively represent an intolerable passion.
</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la"><span class="i1">misero quod omnes</span><br />
 <span>Eripit sensus mihi; Nam simul te</span><br />
 <span>Lesbia aspexi, nihil est super mî</span><br />
 <span class="i1">Quod loquar amens</span><br />
 <span>Lingua sed torpet, tenuis sub artus</span><br />
 <span>Flamma dimanant, sonitu suopte</span><br />
 <span>Tinniunt aures, gemina teguntur</span>
 <span class="i1">Lumina nocte.</span></i></p>
<p>―Catul. Epig. xlviii. 5.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span class="i2">miserably from one</span><br />
<span>This bereaves all sense: for I can no sooner</span><br />
<span>Eye you my sweet heart, but I wot not one word to speak amazed.</span><br />
<span>Tongue-tied as in a trance, while a sprightly thin flame</span><br />
<span>Flows in all my joints with a self-resounding</span><br />
<span>Both my ears tingle, with a night redoubled</span><br />
<span class="i1">Both mine eyes are veiled.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>
 Nor is it in the liveliest and most ardent heat of the fit that we are able to display our plaints and persuasions, the soul being then aggravated with heavy thoughts, and the body suppressed and languishing for love. And thence is sometimes engendered that casual faintness, which so unseasonably surprises passionate lovers, and that childlikeness, which by the</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la">Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent.</i><br />
    ―Seneca <i>Hippolytus</i>, act 2, scene 2.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>Light cares can freely speak,</span><br />
 <span>Great cares heart rather break.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>The surprise of an unexpected pleasure astonishes us likewise.</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la">Ut me conspexit venientem, et Troja circum<br />
 <span>Arma amens vidit, magnis exterrita monstris,</span><br />
 <span>Deriguit visu in medio, calor ossa relinquit,</span><br />
 <span>Labitur, et longo vix tandem tempore fatur.</span></i></p>
 <p>―Virgil <i>Ænid 1</i>, book 3, 306.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>When she beheld me come, and round about</span><br />
 <span>Senseless saw Trojan arms, she stood afraid</span><br />
 <span>Stone-still at so strange sights: life heat flew out.</span><br />
 <span>She faints: at last, with long pause thus she said.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Besides the Roman lady, who died for joy to see her son return alive from the battle of Cannae; Sophocles and Dionysius the Tyrant, who deceased through overgladness; and Talva, who died in Corsica, reading the news of the honors the Roman Senate had conferred him; it is reported that in our age, Pope Leo the tenth having received advertisement of the taking of the city of Milan, which be had so exceedingly desired, entered into such excess of joy, that he fell into an ague whereof he shortly died. And for a more authentic testimony of humane imbecility, it is noted by our Ancients that Diodorus the Logician, being surprised with an extreme passion or apprehension of shame, fell down stark dead (because neither in his School, nor in public, had he been able to resolve an argument propounded to him). I am little subject to these violent passions. I have naturally a hard apprehension, which by discourse I daily harden more and more.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter III:<br />Our affections are transported beyond ourselves.</h2>
<p>Those who still accuse men for ever gaping after future things, and go about to teach us to take hold of present fortunes and settle ourselves upon them, as having no hold of that which is to come—indeed much less than we have of that which is already past—touch and are ever harping upon the commonest human error, if they dare call that an error, to which Nature herself, for the service of the continuation of her work, does address us, imprinting (as it does many others) this false imagination in us, as more jealous of our actions than of our knowledge. We are never in ourselves, but beyond. Fear, desire, and hope, draw us ever towards that which is to come, and remove our sense and consideration from that which is, to amuse us on that which shall be, indeed when we shall be no more. <i xml:lang="la">Calamitosus est animus futuri anxius.</i> A mind in suspense of what is to come is in a pitiful case.</p>
<p>This noble precept is often cited in Plato: “Follow your business and know yourself.” Each of these two members does generally imply all our duty, and likewise enfolds his companion. He that should do his business might perceive that his first lesson is to know what he is, and what is convenient for him. And he that knows himself, takes no more another’s matters for his own, but, above all other things, loves and corrects himself, and rejects superfluous occupations, idle imaginations, and unprofitable propositions. As if you grant folly what it desires it will no whit be satisfied, so is wisdom content with that which is present, and never displeased with itself.</p>
<p>Epicurus does dispense with his age touching the foresight and care of what shall insue. Amongst the laws that regard the deceased, that which ties the actions of Princes to be examined when they are dead, seems to me very solid. They are companions, if not masters of the laws: That which justice could not work on their heads, it is reason it effect upon their reputation, and goods of their successors: things we many times prefer before our lives. It is a custom brings many singular commodities unto nations that observe it, and to be desired of all good Princes: who have cause to complain that the memory of the wicked is used as theirs. We owe a like obedience and subjection to all Kings, for it respects their office; but estimation and affection, we owe it only to their virtue. If they be unworthy, we are to endure them patiently, to conceal their vices, and to aid their indifferent actions with our commendations, as long as their authority has need of our assistance, and that ought to be ascribed unto political order. But our commerce with them being ended, there is no reason we should refuse the unfolding of our felt wrongs unto justice and our liberty. And specially to refuse good subjects the glory to have reverently and faithfully served a master whose imperfections were so well known unto them, exempting posterity from so profitable an example. And such as for the respect of some private benefit or interest, do wickedly embrace the memory of an unworthy Prince, do particular justice at the charge of public justice.</p>
<p>Titus Livius speaks truly, where he says that the speech of men brought up under a royalty is ever full of vain ostentations and false witness—every man indifferently extolling the King, to the furthest strain of valor and sovereign greatness. The magnanimity of those two soldiers may be reproved, one of which, being demanded of Nero why he hated him, answered him to his teeth: I loved you while you were worthy of love, but since you becamest a parricide, a firebrand, a jester, a player, and a coachman, I hate you, as you deserve. The other being asked why he sought to kill him, answered: Because I find no other course to hinder your incessant outrages and impious deeds. But can any man, that has his senses about him, justly prove the public and general testimonies that since his death have been given, and so shall be forever, both against him and all such like reprobates, of his tyrannical and wicked demeanours?</p>
<p>I am sorry that, in so sacred a policy as the Lacedaemonian was, so feigned and foolish a ceremony at the death of their Kings was ever devised and brought in use. All their confederates and neighbors, all the slave-helots, men and women pell-mell, for a testimony of their grief and sorrow, did mangle and gash their foreheads, and in their outcries and lamentations exclaimed that their deceased King, however he had lived, was and had been the best Prince that ever they had, ascribing in order the commendations due unto desert, and to the last and latter rank what belongs unto the first merit.</p>
<p>Aristotle, who has an oar in every water and meddles with all things, makes a question about Solon’s speech, who says that no man can truly be counted happy before his death: Whether he that lived and died according to his wish may be named happy, whether his renown be good or ill, and whether his posterity be miserable or no. While we stir and remove, we transport ourselves by preoccupation wherever we list: but no sooner are we out of being, but we have no communication at all with that which is. And it were better to tell Solon, that never man is happy then, since he never is so, but when he is no more.</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><span class="i2">—Quisquam</span><br />
 <span>Vix radicitus e vita se tollit, et ejicit:</span><br />
 <span>Se facit esse qui quiddam super inscius ipse,</span><br />
 <span>Nee removet satis a projecto corpora sese, et</span><br />
 <span>Vindicat.—</p>
 <p>―Lucretius <i xml:lang="la">De Rerum Natura</i> book 3, 912</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>Scarce any rids himself of life so clear</span><br />
 <span>But leaves unwitting some part of him here:</span><br />
 <span>Nor frees or quits himself sufficiently</span><br />
 <span>From that his body which forlorn does lie.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Bertrand du Guesclin died at the siege of the castle of Randon, near unto Puy in Avergne: the besieged, yielding afterwards, were forced to carry the keys of the Castle upon the decease of the Captain. Bartholomew d’Alviano, General of the Venetian forces, dying in their service and wars about Brescia, and his body being to be transported to Venice through the territory of Verona, which was then enemy unto them, the greatest part of the army thought it expedient to demand a safe conduct for their passage of those of Verona, to which Teodoro Trivulzio stoutly opposed himself, and chose rather to pass it by main force and to hazard the day, saying it was not convenient that he who in his lifetime had never apprehended fear of his enemies should now, being dead, seem to fear them. Verily in like matters, by the laws of Greece he that required a dead body of his enemies, with intent to bury the same, renounced the victory and might no more erect any trophy of it—and he, who was so required, purchased the title of honor and gain. So did Nicias lose the advantage he had clearely gained of the Corinthians; and contrariwise, Agesilaus assured that, he doubtfully had gotten of the Boeotians.</p>
<p>These actions might be deemed strange, if in all ages it were not a commonly received opinion, not only to extend the care of ourselves beyond this life, but also to believe, that heavenly favors do often accompany us into our grave, and continue in our posterity. Whereof there are so many examples (leaving our modern apart) that I need not wade far into it.</p>
<p>Edward the first, King of England, in the long wars he had with Robert, King of Scotland—having by trial found how greatly his presence advantaged the success of his affairs, and how he was ever victorious in any enterprise he undertook in his own person—when he died, bound his son by solemn oath, that being dead he should cause his body to be boiled until the flesh fell from the bones, which he should cause to be interred, and, carefully keeping the bones, ever carry them about him, whenever he should happen to have wars with the Scots. As if destiny had fatally annexed the victory unto his limbs.</p>
<p>Jan Žižka, who for the defense of Wycliffe’s opinions so much troubled the state of Bohemia, commanded that after his death his body should be flayed, and a drum made of his skin, to be carried and sounded in all the wars against his enemies—deeming the sound of it would be a means to continue the advantages which in his former wars he had obtained of them. Certain Indians did likewise carry the bones of one of their Captains in the skirmishes they had with the Spaniards, in regard of the good success he had while he lived, against them. And other nations of that new-found world, do likewise carry the bodies of such worthy and fortunate men with them as have died in their battles, to serve them in stead of good fortune and encouragement.</p>
<p>The first examples reserve nothing else in their tombs but the reputation acquired by their former achievements: but these will also adjoin unto it the power of working. The act of Captain Bayard is of better composition, who perceiving himself deadly wounded by a shot received in his body, being by his men persuaded to come off and retire himself from out of the throng, answered: he would not now so near his end begin to turn his face from his enemy—and having stoutly fought so long as he could stand, feeling himself to faint and stagger from his horse, commanded his steward to lay him against a tree, but in such sort that he might die with his face toward the enemy, as indeed he did.</p>
<p>I may not omit this other example, as remarkable for this consideration, as any of the preceding. The Emperor Maximilian, great grandfather to Philip, now King of Spain, was a Prince highly endowed with many noble qualities, and amongst others with a well-nigh matchless comeliness of body; but with other customs of his, he had this one much contrary to other Princes (who to dispatch their weightiest affairs make often their chamber pot their regal Throne or Council-Chamber) which was that he would not permit any groom of
his chamber (were he never so near about him) to see him in his inner chamber, who if he had occasion but to make water, would as nicely and as religiously withdraw himself as any maiden, and never suffer so much as a physician, much less any other whatsoever, to see those private parts that all in modesty seek to keep secret and unseen. My self, that am so broad-mouthed and lavish in speeches, am notwithstanding naturally touched with that bashfulness. And unless it be by the motion of necessity or of voluptuousness, I never willingly imparted those actions and parts (which custom wills to be concealed) to the view of any creature. I endure more compulsion than I deem befitting a man, especially of my profession. But he grew to such superstition, that by express words in his last will and Testament, he commanded that being dead he should have underclothes put about them. He should by codicil have annexed unto it, that he who should put them on might have his eyes blindfolded.</p>
<p>The instruction which Cyrus gives his children, that neither they nor any other should either see or touch his body after the breath were once out of it, I ascribe it unto some motive of devotion in him. For both his historian and himself, amongst many other notable qualities they are endowed with, have throughout all the course of their life seemed to have a singular respect and awful reverence unto religion.</p>
<p>That story displeased me very much, which a nobleman told me of a kinsman of mine (a man very famous and well known both in peace and war), which is, that dying very aged in his court, being much tormented with extreme pangs of the stone, he, with an earnest and unwearied care, employed all his last hours to dispose the honor and ceremony of his funerals, and summoned all the nobility that came to visit him, to give him assured premise to be as assistants, and to convey him to his last resting place. To the very same Prince who was with him at his last gasp, he made very earnest suit he would command all his household to wait upon him at his interment, enforcing many reasons, and alleging diverse examples to prove that it was a thing very convenient and fitting a man of his quality: which assured promise when he had obtained, and had at his pleasure marshalled the order how they should march, he seemed quietly and contentedly to yield up the ghost. I have seldom seen a vanity continue for so long.</p>
<p>This other curiosity, entirely opposite unto it (which to prove I need not labor for home-examples) seems in my opinion first cousin to this, that is, when one is ever ready to breathe his last, carefully and passionately to endeavor how to reduce the convoy of his obsequies unto some particular and unwonted parcimony, to one servant and to one lantern. I hear the humor and appointment of Marcus Æmilius Lepidus commended, who expressly forbade his heirs to use those ceremonies about his interment, which in such cases were formerly accustomed. Is it temperance and frugality, to avoid charge and voluptuousness, the use and knowledge of which is imperceptible unto us? See here an easy reformation, and of small cost. Were it requisite to appoint any, I would be of opinion that, as well in that as in all other actions of man’s life, every man should refer the rule of it to the quality of his fortune. And the Philosopher Lycon did wisely appoint his friends to place his body where they should think it fittest and for the best: and for his obsequies, they should neither be superfluous and over-costly, nor base and sparing. For my part, I would wholly rely on custom, which should dispose this ceremony, and would yield myself to the discretion of the first or next into whose hands I might chance to fall. <i xml:lang="la">Totus hic locus est contemnendus in nobis, non negligendus in nostris</i>: “All this matter should be despised of us, but not neglected of ours.” And religiously said a holy man: <i xml:lang="la">Curatio funeris, conditio sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt vivorum solatia, quam subsidia mortuorum</i>: “In the procuration of funerals, the manner of burial, the pomp of obsequies, are rather comforts to the living, than helps to the dead.” Therefore Socrates answered Criton, who at the hour of his death asked him how he would be buried: Even as you please, said he.</p>
<p>Were I to meddle further with this subject, I would deem it more gallant to imitate those who, yet living and breathing, undertake to enjoy the order and honor of their sepulchres, and that please themselves to behold their dead countenance in marble. Happy they that can rejoice and gratify their sense with insensibility, and live by their death!</p>
<p>A little thing would make me conceive an inexpiable hatred against all popular domination—although it seem most natural and just unto me—when I call to mind that inhumane injustice of the Athenians, who, without further trial or remission, indeed without suffering them so much as to reply or answer for themselves, condemned those noble and worthy Captains that returned victoriously from the sea battle, which they (near the Arginusæ islands) had gained of the Macedenonians—the most contested, bloody, and greatest fight the Greeks ever obtained by sea with their own forces—forasmuch as after the victory, they had rather followed those occasions which the law of war presented unto them, for their avail, than to their prejudice stayed to gather and bury their dead men. And the success of Diomedon makes their ruthless execution more hateful, who being a man of notable and exemplary virtue, both military and political, and of them so cruelly condemned; after he had heard the bloody sentence, advancing himself forward to speak, having fit opportunity and plausible audience; he, I say, instead of excusing himself, or endeavoring to justify his cause, or to exasperate the evident iniquity of so cruel a doom, expressed but a care of the Judges preservation, earnestly beseeching the Gods to turn that judgement to their good, praying that for want of not satisfying the vows which he and his companions had vowed in acknowledgement and thanksgiving for so famous a victory and honorable fortune, they might not draw the wrath and revenge of the Gods upon them, declaring what their vows were. And without more words, or any further reasons, courageously addressed himself to his execution. But fortune some years after punished him likewise, and made him taste of the very same sauce. For Chabrias, Captain General of their sea fleet, having afterward obtained a famous victory of Pollis, Admiral of Sparta, in the Isle of Naxos, lost absolutely the benefit of it, and only contented with the day (a matter of great consequence for their affairs) fearing to incur the mischief of this example, and to save a few dead carcasses of his friends, that floated up and down the sea, gave leisure to an infinite number of his living enemies, whom he might easily have surprised, to sail away in safety, who afterward made them to purchase their importunate superstition, at a dear-dear rate.</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la"><span>Quaeris, quo jaceas, post obitum, loco</span><br />
 <span>Quo non nata jacent.</span></i></p>
 <p>―Seneca <i>Troades</i>, chorus, act 2, verse 30.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>Where shall you lie when you are dead?</span><br />
 <span>Where they lie that were never bred.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>This other restores the sense of rest unto a body without a soul,</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la"><span>Neque sepulchrum, quo recipiat, habeat portum corporis.</span><br />
 <span>Ubi remi ssa humana vita, corpus requiescat a malis?</span></i></p>
 <p>―Cicero <i>Tusculanæ Quæstiones</i> book 1. Enni.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>To turn in as a haven, have he no grave,</span><br />
 <span>Where life left, from all grief he rest may have.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Even as Nature makes us to see that many dead things have yet certain secret relations unto life. Wine does alter and change in cellars, according to the changes and alterations of the seasons of its vineyard. And the flesh of wild beasts and venison does change quality and taste in the salting-tubs, according to the nature of living flesh, as some say that have observed it.
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter IV: How the soul discharges her passions upon false objects when the true fail it.</h2>
<p>A gentleman of ours, exceedingly subject to the gout, being instantly solicited by his physicians to leave all manner of salt-meats, was wont to answer pleasantly, that when the fits or pangs of the disease took him, he would have somebody to quarrel with; and that crying and cursing, now against baloney-sausage, and sometimes by railing against salt beef-tongues, and gammons of bacon, he found some ease. But in good earnest even as the arm being lifted up to strike, if the stroke hit not, but fall void, we feel some pain in it, and many times strike it out of joint; and that to yield our sight pleasant, it must not be lost and dispersed in the vast air, but ought rather to have a limited bound to sustain it by a reasonable distance.</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la"><span>Ventus ut amittit vires, nisi robore densæ,</span><br />
 <span>Occurrant silvæ, spatio diffasus inani.</span></i></p>
 <p>―Lucan, <i>Pharsalia</i> book 3, 362.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>As winds in empty air diffus’d, strength lose,</span><br />
 <span>Unless thick-old-grown woods their strength oppose.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>So seems it that the soul moved and tossed, if she have not some hold to take, loses itself in itself, and must ever be stored with some object, on which it light and work. Plutarch says fitly of those who affectionate themselves to monkeys and little dogs, that the loving part which is in us, for want of a lawful hold, rather than it will be idle, does forge a false and frivolous hold unto itself. And we see that the soul in her passions does rather deceive itself, by framing a false and fantastic subject unto itself, indeed against her own conceit, than not to work upon something. So does their own rage transport beasts to set upon the stone or weapon that has hurt them—indeed sometimes with irefull teeth to revenge themselves against themselves—for the hurt or smart they feel.</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="la"><span>Pannonis haud aliter post ictum sævior ursa</span><br />
 <span>Cum jaculum parva Libys amentavit habena,</span><br />
 <span>Se rotat in vulnus, telumque irata receptum</span><br />
 <span>Impetit, et secum fugientem circuit hastam.</span></i></p>
 <p>―Lucan, <i>Pharsalia</i> book 6, 220.</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>Even so the wound-enraged Austrian bear,</span><br />
 <span>On whom a Moor has thir’ld his slinged spear,</span><br />
 <span>Wheels on her wound, and raging bites the dart,</span><br />
 <span>Circling that flies with her, and cannot part.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>What causes do we not invent for the crosses that happen unto us? Be it right or wrong: what take we not hold of, to have something to strive with? It is not the golden locks you tear, nor the whiteness of the breast, which you through vexation so cruelly do smite, that have by means of an unlucky bullet lost your dear-beloved brother. On something else should you avenge yourself. Livius, speaking of the Roman army in Spain, after the loss of two great Captains that were brethren: <i xml:lang="la">Flere omnes repente, et offensare capita</i>: &ldquo;They all wept and often beat their heads.&rdquo; It is an ordinary custom. And the philosopher Bion was very pleasant with the king, who for grief tore his hair, when he said, &ldquo;Does this man think that baldness will assuage his grief?&rdquo; Who has not seen some to chew and swallow cards, and well-nigh choke themselves with pairs of dice, only to be revenged for the loss of some money? Xerxes whipped the sea, and wrote a challenge of defiance to the hill Athos. And Cyrus for many days together amused his whole army to be revenged of the river Gyndus, for the fear he took passing over the same. And Caligula caused a very fair house to be defaced, for the pleasure his mother had received in the same.</p>
<p>When I was young, my countrymen were wont to say that one of our neighbor-Kings, having received a blow at Gods hand, swore to be revenged on him, and ordained that for ten years space no man should pray unto him, nor speak of him, nor (so long as he were in authority), believe in him. By which report, they do not so much publish the sottishness, as the ambitious glory, peculiar unto that nation of whom it was spoken. They are vices that ever go together, but in truth such actions incline rather unto self-conceit than to foolishness. Augustus Cæsar, having been beaten by a tempest on the sea, defied the God Neptune, and in the celebration of the Circensian games, that so he might be avenged on him, he caused his image to be removed from the place, where it stood amongst the other Gods; wherein he is also less excusable than the former, and less than he was afterward, when having lost a battle under Quintilius Varus in Germany, all in a rage and desperate, he went up and down beating his head against the walls, mainly crying out: &ldquo;Oh! Varus, restore me my soldiers again.&rdquo; For those exceed all folly (forasmuch as impiety is joined unto it) that will avenge themselves against God, or fortune, as if she had ears subject to our battery. In imitation of the Thracians, who when it lightens or thunders, begin with a Titanian revenge to shoot against heaven, thinking by shooting of arrows to draw God to some reason. Now, as says that ancient Poet in Plutarch,</p>
<blockquote>
 <p><i xml:lang="fr"><span>Point ne se faut courroucer aux affaires,</span><br />
 <span>Il ne leur chaut de toutes nos choleres.</span></i></p>
 <p>&qdash;Plutarch <i>Of Contentment</i>, chapter 4 in Amyot’s translation</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
 <p><span>We ought not angry be at what God dooth,</span><br />
 <span>For he cares not who bears an angry tooth.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p>
 But we shall never rail enough against the disorder and unruliness of our mind.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter V.<br />Whether the captain of a place besieged ought to sally forth to parlay</h2>
<p>Lucius Marcius, Legate of the Romans, in the war against Perseus, King of Macedon, desirous to get so much time as he wanted to prepare his army, gave out some motives of accord, wherewith the king
inveagled, yielded unto a truce for certain days: by which means he
furnished his enemy with opportunity and leisure to arm himself:
whereof proceeded the Kings last ruine and over-throw. Yet is it, that

the elders of the Senate, mindfull of their fore-fathers customs, condemned this practice
as an enemy to their ancient proceedings, which was, said they, to fight with virtue, and
not with craft, not by surprises, or stratagems by night, nor by set-flights, and unlookt-for
approches, never undertaking a war, but after it was proclaimed, indeed many times after
the appointed hour and place of the battle. With this conscience did they send backe to
Pirrhus his traitorous Physitian, and to the Phalisci their disloyall schoolemaster. These
were true Roman proceedings, and not Greek policies, nor Punike whes, with whom to
vanquish by force is less glorious than to conquer by treacherie. To deceive may serve
for the instant but he only is judged to be overcome, that knowes he was not vanquished
by craft or deceit, nor by fortune or chance, but by meere valor, betweene troupe and
troupe, in an overt and just war. It appeareth manifestly by the speech of these good
men, they had not yet received this sentence.
Dolus, an virtus, quis in hoste requirat? -- VIR. æn. 1. ii. 390.
Deceit, or virtue, either, in foes, it skills not whether.
The Achaians, says Polibius, detested all manner of deceit in their wars, deeming that
no victory, where their enemies courages were not quelled. Eam vir sanctus, et sapiens
sciat esse victoriam veram, quæ salva fide, et integra dignitate parabitur. ’A wise and
religious man will know that is victory indeed, which shall be attained with credit
unimpeached, and dignitie untainted,’ says another.
Vos ne velit, an me regnare hera, quid-ve ferat fors,
Virtute experiamur. -- CIC. Offic.
If fortune will have you to raigne, or me,
And what chance brings, let virtue’s trial be.
In the Kingdome of Ternates, among those nations, which we so full-mouthed, call
barbarous, the custom beareth, that they never undertake a war, before the same be
denounced; thereunto adding an ample declaration of the means they have to employ
therein, what manner, and how many men, what munition, and what Armes either
offensive or defensive: which done, they also establish as a law, that without reproach or
imputation, it shall be lawfull for any man, in their wars, to use what advantage soever,
may in any sort further or help them to vanquish. The ancient Florentines were so far from
desiring any advantage of their enemies by sudden surprises, that a moneth before they
could bring their Armie into the field, they would give them warning, by the continuall
sound of their common bell, which they called Martinella. As for us, who are less
superstitious, and deem him to have the honor of the war, that has the profit of it, and
according to Lisander, say, that ’Where the Lions-skinne will not suffice, we must adde a
scantling of the Foxes;’ the most ordinary occasions of surprises are drawne from this

practice, and as we say, there is no time, wherein a Captain ought to be more warie and
circumspect to looke about him, than that of parlies, and treaties of accord: And therefore
is it a common rule in the mouth of all our modern men of war, that the Governour or
Commaunder of a besieged place, ought never to sallie forth himself to parlie. In the time
of our forefathers, the same was cast in the teeth (as a reproach) unto the Lord of
Montmord and Assigni, who defended Mouson, against the Earle of Nanseaw. Yet in this
case it were excusable in him, that should so sallie out, that the assurance and advantage,
might still be on his side. As did the Earle Guido Rangoni in the city of Rhegium (if credit
may be given to Bellay: for Guicciardin affirmeth, that it was himself) when as the Lord
of Escute, coming to parlie made his approaches unto it; for he did so little forsake his
fort, that while they were in parlie, a commotion being raised, the Lord of Escute and the
troupes which came with him, in that tumult found himself to be the weakest, so that
Alexander Trivultio was there slain, and he deeming it the safest way, was forced to
follow the Earle, and on his word to yield himself to the mercy and shelter of blowes,
into the City. Eumenes in the City of Nera, being urged by Antigenus, that besieged him,
to sallie forth to parlie, alleging that there was reason he should come to him, sith he was
the better man, and the stronger: after he had made, this noble answer, ’I will never think
any man better than myself, so long as I can hold or rule my sword;’ nor did he ever
yield until Antigonus had delivered him Ptolomey, his own nephew for a pledge, whom
he required. Yet shall we see some to have prospered well in sallying foorth of their
holdes to parlie, upon the word and honor of the assailant; witnes Henrie of Vaulx, a
knight of Champaigns, who being beleagred by the English-men in the Castle of
Commercie, and Bartholmew of Bones, who at that siege commaunded as Chiefe having
caused the greatest part of the Castle to be undermined, so that there wanted nothing but
the giving of fire, utterly to subvert the same, under the ruines of it, summoned the said
Henrie to issue out, and for his own good to parlie with him, which he did, accompanied
but with three more, who manifestly seeing the evident ruine, wherein he was undoubtedly
like to fall, acknowledged himself infinitely beholding to his enemies unto whose
discretion, after he had yielded together with his troup, and that fire the Castle was given
to the Mine, the main props of the Castle failing, it was utterly overthrowne and carried
away. I am easily persuaded to yield to other mens words and faith, but hardly would I
do it, when I should give other men cause to imagine, that I had rather done it through
despare and want of courage, than of a free and voluntary choise, and confidence in his
honestie and well-meaning.




Return to


Book I: Chapter VI.
THAT THE HOURE OF PARLIES IS DANGEROUS






THAT THE HOURE OF PARLIES IS DANGEROUS
OTWITHSTANDING I saw lately, that those of Musidan, a place not
far from me, who with others of their partie were by our forces
compelled to dislodge thence, exclaimed, they were betraid, because
during the speech of accord, and the treatie yet continuing, they had
been surprised and defeated; which thing might perhaps other ages have
had some apparence of truth; but, I say, our manner of proceeding in
such cases, is altogether differing from these rules, and no man ought to expect
performance of promise from an enemy, except the last seale of bond be fully annexed
thereunto, wherein notwithstanding is then much care and vigilancie required, and much
adoe shall be found. And it was ever a dangerous counsell to trust the performance of
word or oath given unto a City, that yields unto gentle and favourable composition, and
in that fury to give the needie, bloudthirstie, and prey-greed Souldier free entrance into it,

unto the free choise and licence of a victorious army. Lucius Emilius Regulus a Roman
Proctor, having lost his time in attempting by force to take the City of the Phocens by
reason of the singular prowess, which the inhabitants showed, in stoutly defending
themselves, covenanted to receive them as friends unto the people of Rome, and to enter
their City as a place confederate, removing all fear of hostile-action from them. But to
the end he might apeare more glorious and dreadfull, having caused his army to enter
with him, do what he might, be could not bridle the rage of his Soldiers; and with his
own eyes saw most part of the City ransacked and spoiled: the rights of covetousnesse
and revenge supplanting those of his authority and militarie discipline. Cleomenes was
wont to say, that ’What hurt soever a man might do his enemies in time of war, was
beyond justice, and not subject unto it, as well towards the Gods as towards men:’ who for
seven dayes having made truce with those of Argos, the third night, while they were all
asleepe mistrusting no harme, he charged and overthrew them, aleaging for his excuse,
that in the truce no mention had been made of nights. But the Gods left not his perfidious
policy unrevenged: For during their enter-parlie and business about taking hostages, the
City of Casilinum was by surprise taken from him: which happened in the times of the
justest Captains, and of the most perfect Roman discipline: For it is not said, that time
and place serving, we must not make use and take advantage of our enemies foolish
oversight, as we do of their cowardise. And verily war has naturally many reasonable
privileges to the prejudice of reason. And here failes the rule; Neminem id agere, ut ex
alterius prædetur inscitia: ’That no man should endeavour to prey upon another mans
ignorance.’ But I wonder of the scope that Xenophon allowes them, both by his discourse,
and by diverse exploits of his perfect Emperor: an Author of wonderful consequence in
such things, as a great Captain and a Philosopher, and one of Socrates chiefest Disciples,
nor do I altogether yield unto the measure of his dispensation. The Lord of Aubigny
besieging Capua, after he had given it a furious battery, the Lord Fabritius Colonna,
Captain of the town, having from under a bastion or skonce begunne to parlie, and his
men growing negligent and carelesse in their offices and guard, our men did suddenly take
the advantage offered them, entered the town, over-ranne it, and put all to the sword. But
to come to later examples, indeed in our memory, the Lord Iulio Romero at Yvoy, having
committed this oversight to issue out of his holde, to parlie with the Constable of France,
at his return found the Town taken, and himself jack-out- of-doores. But that we may
not pass out unrevenged, the Marques of Pescara beleagering Genova, where the Duke
Octavian Fregoso commanded under our protection, and an accord between them having
so long been treated, and earnestly solicited, that it was held as ratified, and upon the point
of conclusion, the Spaniards being entered the Town, and seeing themselves the stronger,
took their opportunity and used it as a full and compleate victory: and since at Lygny in
Baroe, where the Earle of Brienne commanded, the Emperor having besieged him in
person, and Bartholemy Lieutenant to the said Earle, being come foorth of his hold to
parlie, was no sooner out, while they were disputing, but the Town was surprised, and
he excluded, They say,
Fu il vincer sempre mai laudabil cosa,

Vincasi o per fortuna o per ingegno. -- ARIST. cant. xv. stan. 1.
To be victorious, evermore was glorious,
Be we by fortune or by wit victorious.
But the Philosopher Chrsippus would not have been of that opinion; nor I neither, for be
was wont to say, ’That those who run for the masterie may well employ all their strength
to make speed, but it is not lawfull for them to lay hands on their adversaries, to stay him,
or to crosse legs, to make him trip or fall.’ And more generously answered Alexander
the Great, at what time Polypercon persuaded him to use the benefit of the advantage
which the darknesse of the night afforded him, to charge Darius. ’No, no,’ said he, ’it fits
not me to hunt after night-stolne victories;’ mato me fortunæ pæniteat, quam tictoriæ
pudeat. (CURT. 1. iv.) I had rather repent me of my fortune, than be ashamed of my
victory.
Atque idem fugientem haud est dignatus Orodem
Sternere, nec jacta cæcum dare cuspide vulnus:
Obvius adversoque occurrit, seque viro vir
Contulit, haud furto melior, sed fortibus armis. -- VIRG. æn.1.x.732.
He deign’d not to strike down Orodes flying,
Or with his throwne-launce blindely-wound him running:
But man to man afront himself applying,
Met him, as more esteem’d for strength than cunning.



Return to


Book I. Chapter VII.
THAT OUR INTENTION JUDGETH OUR ACTIONS






THAT OUR INTENTION JUDGETH OUR ACTIONS
HE common saying is, that ’Death acquits us of all our bonds.’ I know
some that have taken it in another sence. Henry the seventh, King of
England, made a composition with Philip, son to Maximilian the
Emperor or (to give him a more honorable title) father to the
Emperor Charles the fifth, that the said Philip should (deliver into his
hands the Duke of Suffolke, his mortal enemy, who was fled out of
England, and saved himself in the Low countries, always provided the
king should attempt nothing against the Dukes life; which promise notwithstanding, being
near his end, he expresly by will and testament commanded his succeeding-son, that
immediately after his decease, he should cause him to be put to death. In the late tragedie,
which the Duke of Alva presented us withall at Brussels, on the Earles of Horne and

Egmond were many remarkable things and worthy to be noted: and amongst others, that
the said Count Egmond upon whose faithfull word and assurance, the Earle of Horne was
come in and yielded himself to the Duke of Alva, required very instantly to be first put
to death, to the end his death might acquit and free him of the word and bond, which he
ought and was engaged for, to the said Earle of Horne. It seems that death has no whit
discharged the former of his word given, and that the second, without dying was quit of it.
We cannot be tied beyond our strength and means. The reason is, because the effects and
executions are not any way in our power,and except our will, nothing is truly in our
power: on it only are all the rules of man’s dutie grounded and established by necessitie.
And therefore Count Egmond, deeming his mind and will indebted to his promise, how
beit the power to effect it, lay not in his hands; was no doubt cleerely absolved of his debt
and dutie, although be had survived the Count Horne. But the King of England failing of
his word by his intention, cannot be excused, though he delaide the execution of his
disloyaltie until after his death. No more than Herodotus his Mason who during his
natural life, having faithfully kept the secret of his Master the King of Egypts treasure,
when he died discovered the same unto his children. I have in my dayes seen many
convicted by their own conscience, for detaining other men’s goods, yet by their last will
and testament to dispose themselves, after their decease to make satisfaction. This is
nothing to the purpose. Neither to take time for a matter so urgent, nor with so small
interest or show of feeling, to go about to establish an injurie. They are indebted
somewhat more. And by how much more they pay incommodiously and chargably, so
much the more just and meritorious is their satisfaction. Penitence ought to charge, yet
do they worse, who reserve the revealing of some heinous conceit or affection towards
their neighbour, to their last will and affection, having while they lived ever kept it
secret. And seem to have little regard of their own honor, by provoking the partie
offended against their own memory, and less of their conscience, since they could never
for the respect of death cancell their ill-grudging affection, and in extending life beyond
theirs. Oh wicked and ungodly judges, which refer the judgement of a cause to such
time as they have no more knowledge of causes! I will as near as I can prevent, that my
death reveale or utter any thing, my life has not first publikely spoken.



Return to


Book I: Chapter VIII.
OF IDLENESSE






OF IDLENESSE
S we see some idle-fallow grounds, if they be fat and fertile, to bring
foorth store and sundry roots of wild and unprofitable weeds, and that
to keep them in use we must subject and employ them with certain seeds
for our use and service; and as we see some women, though single and
alone, often to bring foorth lumps of shapelesse flesh, whereas to
produce a perfect and natural generation, they must be manured with
another kind of seed; so is it of mindes, which except they be busied
about some subject, that may bridle and keep them under, they will here and there
wildely scatter themselves through the vast field of imaginations.
Sicut aquæ tremulum labris ubi lumnen ahenis

Sole repercwsum, aut radiantis imagine Lunæ,
Omnia pervolitat late loca jamque sub auras
Erigitur, summique ferit laquearia tecti. -- VIRG. Æn. viii. 22
As trembling light reflected from the Sunne,
Or radiant Moone on water-fild brasse lavers,
Flies over all, in aire unpraised soone,
Strikes house-top beames, betwixt both strangely wavers.
And there is no folly, or extravagant raving, they produce not in that agitation.
velut ægri somnia, vanæ
Finguntur species.-- HOR. Art. Poet. vii.
Like sicke mens dreames, that feigne
Inaginations vain.
The mind that has no fixed bound, will easily loose itself: For, as we say, ’To be
everiewhere, is to be nowhere.’
Quisquis ubigue habitat, Maxime, nusquam habitat.-- MART. vii. Epig. 72, 6.
Good sir, he that dwels everywhere,
No where can say, that he dwels there.
It is not long since I retired myself unto my own house, with full purpose, as much as
lay in me, not to trouble myself with any business, but solitarily and quietly to weare
out the remainder of my well-nighspent life; where me thought I could do my spirit no
greater favor, than to give him the full scope of idlenesse, and entertaine him as he best
pleased, and withall, to settle himself as he best liked: which I hoped he might now,
being by time become more setled and ripe, accomplish very easily: but I find,
Variam semper dant otia mentem. -- LUCAN, L iv. 704.
Evermore idlenesse,
Does wavering mindes addresse.
That contrariwise playing the skittish and loosebroken jade, he takes a hundred times
more cariere and liberty unto himself, than he did for others, and begets in me so many
extravagant Chimeræs, and fantastic monsters, so orderlesse, and without any reason,
one hudling upon another, that at leisure to view the foolishnesse and monstrous
strangenesse of them, I have begun to keep a register of them, hoping, if I live, one day

to make him ashamed, and blush at himself.



Return to


Book I. Chapter IX.
OF LYERS






OF LYERS
HERE is no man living, whom it may less beseeme to speak of
memory, than myself, for to say truth, I have none at all: and am fully
persuaded that no mans can be so weake and forgetfull as mine. All
other parts are in me common and vile, but touching memory, I think
to carrie the prise from all other, that have it weakest, nay and to gain
the reputation of it, besides the natural want I endure (for truely
considering the necessitie of it, Plato has reason to name it a great and
mighty goddesse). In my countrie, if a man will imply that one has no sense, he will say,
such a one has no memory: and when I complain of mine, they reprove me, and will not
believe me, as if I accused myself to be mad and senselesse. They make no diference
betweene memory and wit: which is an empairing of my market: But they do me wrong,
for contrariwise it is commonly seen by experience, that excellent memories do rather
accompany weake judgements. Moreover they wrong me in this (who can do nothing so
well as to be a perfect friend) that the same words which accuse my infirmitie, represent
ingratitude. From my affection they take hold of my memory, and of a natural defect,

they infer a want of judgement or conscience. Some will say, he has forgotten this
entreaty or request, or that promise, he is not mindful of his old friends, he never
remembered to say, or do, or conceal this or that, for my sake. Verily I may easily
forget, but to neglect the charge my friend has committed to my trust, I never do it. Let
them bear with my infirmitie, and not conclude it to be a kind of malice; which is so
contrary an enemy to my humor. Yet am I somewhat comforted. First, because it is an
evil, from which I have chieflie drawne the reason to correct a worse mischief, that
would easily have grown upon me, that is to say, ambition; which defect is intolerable in
them that meddle with worldly negotiations. For as diverse like examples of natures
progresse, say, she has happily strengthened other faculties in me, according as it has
grown weaker and weaker in me, and I should easily lay down and wire-draw my mind
and judgement, upon other mens traces, without exercising their proper forces, if by the
benefit of memory, forren inventions and strange opinions were present with me. That my
speech is thereby shorter for the Magazin of Memorie is perhaps more stored with
matter, than is the store- house of Invention. Had it held out with me, I had ere this
wearied all my friends with pratling: the subjects rouzing the meane facultie I have to
manage employ them, strengthening and wresting my discourses. It is pity; I have assayed
by the trial of some of my private friends: according as their memory has ministered
them a whole and perfect matter, who recoile their narration so far-backe, and stuff it
with so many vain circumstances, that if the story be gqod, they smoother the goodnesse
of it: if bad, you must needs either curse the good fortune of their memory, or blame the
misfortune of their judgement. And it is no easy matter, being in the midst of the cariere
of a discourse, to stop cunningly, to make a sudden period, and to cut it off. And there is
nothing whereby the cleane strength of a horse is more known, than to make a readie and
cleane stop. Among the skilfull I see some that strive, but cannot stay their race. While
they labor to find the point to stop their course, they stagger and falter, as men that faint
through weaknesse. Above all, old men are dangerous, who have only the memory of
things past left them, and have lost the remembrance of their repetitions. I have heard
some very pleasant reports become most irkesome and tedious in the mouth of a certain
Lord, forasmuch as all the bye-standers had many times been cloyed with them.
Secondly (as said an ancient Writers that I do not so much remember injuries received. I
had need have a prompter as Darius had, who not to forget the wrong he had received of
the Athenians, whensoever he sate down at his table, caused a page to sing unto him, ’Sir,
remember the Athenians,’ and that the places or bookes which I read over, do ever smile
upon me with some new noveltie. It is not without reason, men say, that be who has not a
good and readie memory should never meddle with telling of lies, and fear to become a
liar. I am not ignorant how the Grammarians make a difference betweene speaking untrue
and lying; and say that to speak untruly is to speak that which is false, but was reputed
true; and that the definition of the Latin word, mentiri, whence the French word, mentir, is
derived, which in English is to lie, implieth and meaneth to go against ones conscience:
and by consequence it concerneth only those, who speak contrary to that which they
know, of whom I speak. Now, these, either invent, seale, stampe and all, or else they
disguise and change a true ground. When they disguise or change, if they be often put to

the repetition of one thing, it is hard for them to keep still in one path, and very strange if
they lose not themselves: because the thing, as it is, having first taken up her stand in the
memory, and there by the way of knowledge and witting, imprinted itself, it were hard it
should not represent itself to the imagination, displacing and supplanting falshood, which
therein can have no such footing, or setled fastnesse; and that the circumstances of the
first learning, still diving into the mind, should not cause it to disperse the remembrance
of all false or bastardizing parts gotten together. Where they altogether invent, forasmuch
as there is no certain impression, to front their falshood, they seem to have so much the
lesser fear to mistake or forget themselves, which also notwithstanding being an airie
body, and without hold-fast may easily escape the memory, except it be well assured,
whereof I have often do my no small pleasure) seen the experience, at the cost of those,
who professe never to frame their speech, but as, best shall fit the affairs they negotiate,
and as best shall please the great men they speak unto. For the circumstances to which
they will subject their credit and conscience, being subject to many changes, their speech
must likewise diversifie and change with them, whence it followeth that of one selfsame
subject they speak diversly, as now yellow, now gray, to one man thus, and thus to
another. And if perhaps these kind of men hoard-up their so contrary instructions,
what becomes of this goodly art? Who besides, often most foolishly forget themselves,
and run at randon: For what memory shall suffice them, to remember so many different
formes they have framed to one same subject? I have in my dayes seen diverse that have
envied the reputation of this worthy kind of wisdom, who perceive not, that if there be a
reputation, there can be no effect. Verily, lying is an ill and detestable vice. Nothing
makes us men, and no other means keeps us bound one to another, but our word; knew
we but the horror and weight of it, we would with fire and sword pursue and hate the
same, and more justly than any other crime. I see all men generally busied (and that very
improperly) to punish certain innocent errours in children which have neither impression
nor consequence, and chastice and vex them for rash and foolish actions. Only lying and
stubbornnesse somewhat more, are the faults whose birth and progresse I would have
severely punished and cut off; for they grow and increase with them: and if the tongue
have once gotten this ill-habit, good Lord how hard, nay how impossible it is to make her
leave it? whereby it ensueth, that we see many very honest men in other matters, to be
subject and enthralled to that fault. I have a good lad to my tailour, whom I never heard
speak a truth, no not when it might stand him instead of profit. If a lie had no more faces
but one, as truth had, we should be in far better termes than we are: For whatsoever a
lier should say, we would take it in a contrary sense. But the opposite of truth has many
shapes, and an undefinite field. The Pythagoreans make good to be certain and finite and
evil to be infinite and uncertain. A thousand by-ways misse the marke, one only hits the
same. Surely I can never assure myself to come to a good end, to warrant an extreme
evident danger, by a shamelesse and solemn lie. An ancient father says, ’We are better in
the companie of a known dogge, than in a mans societie, whose speech is unknown to us.
Vt externus alieno non sit hominis vice: ’A stranger to a stranger is not like a man.’ And
how much is a false speech less sociable than silence? King Francis the first, vaunted
himself to have by this means brought Francis Taverna, ambassador to Francis Sforza,

Duke of Milan, to a non-plus; a man very famous for his rare eloquence, and facilitie in
speech, who had been dispatched to excuse his master, toward his Majestie, of a matter
of great importance, which was this. The King to keep ever some intelligence in Italy,
whence he had lately been expelled, but especially in the Dukedome of Milan, thought
it expedient to entertaine a Gentleman of his about the Duke, in effect as his Ambassador,
but in apparence as a private man; who should make show to reside there about his
particular affairess, forasmuch as the Duke, who depended much more of the Emperor
(chiefely then that he was treating a marriage with his niece, daughter of the King of
Denmarke, who is at this day Dowager of Loraine) could not without great prejudice unto
himself discover to have any correspondencie and conference with us. For which
commission and purpose a Gentleman of Milan, named Merveille, then serving the King
in place of one of the Quiers of his Quierie, was deemed fit. This man being dispatched
with secret letters of credence, and instructions of an Ambassador, together with other
letters, of commendation to the Duke in favor of his particular affairs, as a maske and
pretence of his proceedings, continued so long about the Duke, that the Emperor began
to have some suspition of him; which as we suppose was cause of what ensued, which
was, that under colour of a murther committed, the Duke one night caused the said
Merveille to be beheaded, having ended his processe in two dayes. Master Francis being
come to the Court fraught with a long counterfet deduction of this story (for the King had
addressed himself to all the Princes of Christendome, indeed to the Duke himself for
justice, for such an outrage committed upon his servant had one morning audience in the
Kings councell-chamber: who for the foundation of his cause having established and to
that end projected many goodly and colourable apparences of the fact: namely, that the
Duke his master had never taken Merveille for other than a private gentleman, and his
own subject, and who was come thither about his private busines, where he had never
lived under other name, protesting he had never known him to be one of the King’s
houshold, nor never heard of him, much less taken him for his Majesties Agent. But the
King urging him with diverse, objections and demands, and charging him on every side,
prest him so far with the execution done by night, and as it were by stealth, that the
seely man, being much entangled and suddenly surpised, as if he would set an innocent
face on the matter answered, that for the love and respect of his Majestie, the Duke his
Master would have been very loth that such an execution should have been done by day.
Here every man may guesse whether he were taken short or no, having tripped before so
goodly a nose, as was that of our King Francis the first. Pope Iulius the second, having
sent an ambassador to the King of England to animate him against our aforesaid King: the
Ambassador having his audience touching his charge, and the King in his answer urging
and insisting upon the difficultie he found and foresaw in levying such convenient forces,
as should be required to withstand so mightie, and set upon so puisant a King, and
alleging certain pertinent reasons: The Ambassador fondly and unfitly replied, that
himself had long before maturely considered them and had told the Pope of them. By
which answer so far from his proposition (which was with all speed, and without more
circumstances to undertake and undergoe a dangerous war) the King of England took
hold of the first argument which in effect he afterward found true, which was, that the said

Ambassador, in his own particular intent, was more affected to the French side, whereof
advertising his master, his goods were all confiscate, himself disgraced, and he very
hardly escaped with life.



Return to


Book I: Chapter X.
OF READIE OR SLOW SPEECH






OF READIE OR SLOW SPEECH
NC ne furent a tous toutes qraces donnees. All God’s good graces are
not gone To all, or of all anyone. So do we see that in the gift of
eloquence, some have such a facility and promptitude, and that which
we call utterance, so easy and at command, that at all assaies, and upon
everie occasion, they are ready and provided; and others more slow,
never speak anything except much laboured and premeditated, as
Ladies and daintie Dames are taught rules to take recreations and
bodily exercises, according to the advantage of what they have fairest about them. If I
were to give the like counsel, in those two different advantages of eloquence whereof
Preachers and pleading-lawiers of our age seem to make profession; the slow speaker in
mine opinion should be the better preacher, and the other the better lawier. Forasmuch as
charge of the first allowes him as much leisure as he pleaseth to prepare hims elfe;
moreover his cariere continueth still in one kind without interruption: whereas the
lawyers occasions urging him still upon any accident to be ready to enter the lists: and the
unexpected replies and answers of his adverse parlie, do often divest him from his

purpose, wher he is enforced to take a new course. Yet is it, that at the last enterview
which was at Marseilles betweens Pope Clement the seventh, and Francis the first, our
King, it hapned cleane contrary, where Monsieur Poyet, a man of chief reputation, and
all dayes of his life brought up to plead at the bar, whose charge being to make an Oration
before the Pope, and having long time before premeditated and con’d the remaineth mute,
if he have no leisure to prepare himself, and he likewise to whom leisure gives no
advantage to say better, are both in one self degree of strangeness. It is reported that
Severus Cassius spake better extempore, and without premeditation. That he was more
beholding to fortune, than to his diligence; that to be interrupted in his speech redounded
to his profit: and that his adversaries feared to urge him, lest his sudden anger should
redouble his eloquence. I know this condition of nature by experience, which cannot abide
a vehement and laborious premeditation: except it hold a free, a voluntarie, and self
pleasing course, it can never come to a good end. We commonly say of some
compositions, that they smell of the oile, and of the lampe, by reason of a certain
harshnesse, and rudenesse, which long plodding labor imprints in them that be much
elaborated. But besides the care of well-doing, and the contention of the mind,
overstretched to her enterprise, does breake and impeach the same; even as it happens unto
water, which being closely pent in, through its own violence and abundance, cannot find
issue at an open gullet. In this condition of nature, whereof I now speak, this also is
joined unto it, that it desires not to be pricked forward by these strong passions, as the
anger of Cassius (for that motion would be overrude) it ought not to be violently shaken,
but yieldingly solicited: it desires to be rouzed and prickt forward by strange occasions,
both present and casual. If it go alone, it does but languish and loyteron is her life and
grace. I canuot well conataine myself in my own possession and disposition, chance
has more interest in it than myself; occasion, company, indeed the change of my voice
draws more from my mind than I can find therein, when by myself I second and
endevor to employ the same. My words likewise are better than my writings, if choice
may be had in so worthless things. This also hapheth unto me, that where I seek
myself, I find not myself: and I find myself more by chance, than by the search of
my own judgement. I shall perhaps have cast foorth some suttletie in writing, perhaps
dull and harsh for another, but smooth and curious for myself. Let us leave all these
complements and quaintness. That is spoken by everie man, according to his own
strength, I have so lost it, that I wot not what I would have said, and strangers have
sometilnes found it before me. Had I alwayes a razor about me, where that happens, I
should cleane raze myself out. Fortune may at some other time make the light thereof
appeare brighter unto me than that of mid-day, and will make me wonder at my own
faltring or sticking in the myre.




Return to


CHAPTER XI: OF PROGNOSTICATIONS





 Send
CHAPTER XI: OF PROGNOSTICATIONS
S touching Oracles it is very certain, that long before the coming of
our Saviour Iesus Christ, they had begun to lose their credit: for we see
that Cicero laboureth to find the cause of their declination: and these
be his words: Cur isto modo jam oracula Delphis non eduntur, non
modo nostra ætate, sed jamdiu, ut nihil possit esse contemptius? ’Why
in like sort are not oracles now uttered, not only in our t imes, but a
good while since, so as now nothing can be more contemptible?’ But as
for other Prognostikes, that were drawne from the anatomie of beasts in sacrifice, to which
Plato does in some sort ascribe the natural constitution of the intermall members of them,
of the scraping of chickens, of the flight of birds, Aves quasdam rerum augurandarum
causa natas esse putamus: ’We are of opinion’, certain birds were even bred to
prognosticate some things; of thunders, of turnings and backe-recourse of rivers.’ Multa
cernunt aruspices: multa augures provident: multa oraculis declarantur: multa
vaticinationibus: multa somniis: multa portentis: ’Soothsayers see much: bird-prophets
foresee as much: much is foretold by Oracles; much by prophecies; much by portentuous
signes,’ and others, upon which antiquitie grounded most of their enterprises, as well

public as private: our religion has abolished them. And albeit there remaine yet amongst
us some means of divination in the starres, in spirits; in shapes of the body in dreames,
and elsewhere a notable example of the mad and foolish curiosity of our nature, ammusing
itself to preoccupate future things, as if it had not enough to do to digest the present.
-------cur hanc titi, rector Olympi Sollicitis mortalibus addere curam, Noscant venturas ut
dira per omnia cla des Bit subitum quodcunque paras, sit cæca futuri Mens hominum fati,
liceat sperare timenti. Why pleas’d it you, you ruler of the spheares, To adde this care to
mortals care-clog’d mind; That they their misery know, ere it appeares? Let your drifts
sudden come; let men be blinde T’wards future fate: oh let him hope that feares. Ne utile
quidem est scire quid futurum sit: Miserum est enim, nihil profidentem angi: It is not so
much as profitable for us to know what is to come, for it is a miserable thing, a man
should fret and be vexed, and do no good.’ Yet is it of much less authority, lo here,
why the example of Francis Marquis of Salum has seemed remarkable unto me:
who being Lieutenant General unto Francis our King, and over all his forces, which he
then had beyond the Mountaines in Italie, a man highly favoured in al our court, and
otherwise infinitly beholding to the King for that very, Mar quisate, which his brother had
forfeited: and having no occasion to do it, indeed his mind and affections contradicting
the same, buffered himself to be frighted and deluded (as it has since been manifestly
prooved) by the foolish Prognostications which then throughout all Europe were given out to
the advantage of the Emperor Charles the fift and to our prejudice in Italy, where these
foolish predictions so much possesed the Italians, that in Rome there were laid great
wagers, and much money give n out upon the exchange, that we should utterly be
overthrowne) that after he had much condoled, indeed complained with his secret friends,
the unavoidable miseries which he foresaw prepared by the fates against the Crowne of
France, and the many friends he had there, he unkindly revolted, and became a turn-cote
on the Emperors side, to his intolerable loss and destraction, notwithstanding all the
constellations then reigning. But be was drawne unto it as a man encompassed and beset
by diverse passions; for having both strong castles, and all manner of munition and strength
in his own hands, the enemies army under Antonio Leva about three paces from him,
and we nothing mistrusting him, it was in his power to do worse than he did. For
notwithstanding his treason, we lost neither man nor town, except Fossan, which long
after was by us stoutly contested and defended. Prudens futuri temporis exitum Caliginosa
nocte premit Deus, Ridetque, si mortalis ultra Fas trepidat. Our wise God hides in pitch-
darke night Of future time the event decreed, And laughes at man, if man (affright) Fear
more than he to fear has need. Ille potens sui Lætqusue deget, cui licet in diem Dixisse,
vixi, cras vel atra Nube polum pater occupato, Vel sole puro. He of himself lives merily,
Who each day, I have liv’d, can say, To morrow let God charge the skiee With darke
clouds, or fair sun-shine-ray. Lætus in præsens animus, quod ultra est, Oderit curare.3
For present time a mery mind Hates to respect what is behind. And those which take this
word in a contrary sense are in the wrong. Ista sic reciprocantur ut et si divinatio sit dii
sint, et si dii sint sit divinatio: quence is so reciprocall as if there be any divination, there
are Gods: and if there be Gods, there is divination.’ Much more wisely Pacuvius. Nam istis
linguam avium intelligunt, Plusque ex alieno jecoresapiunt, quam ex suo Magis

audiendum, quam auscultandum c ensio.1 Who understand what language birds express,
By their own than beasts-livers knowing less, They may be heard, not hearkned to, I
guesse. This so famous art of divination of the Tuskanes grew thus. A husband-man
digging very deepe intothe ground saw Tages, a demy-God appear out of it, with an
infantine face, yet fraught with an age-like wisdom. All men ran to see him, and both his
words and knowledgee were for many ages after remembred, and collecte d, containing
the principles and means of this art. An ofspring suitable to her progresse. I would rather
direct affairs by the chance of dice, than by such frivolous dreames. And truly in all
common-wealths, men have ever ascribed much authority unto lot. Plato in the policy
which he imagineth by discretion, ascribed the deciding of many important effects unto it,
and amongst other things would have marriages betweene the good to be contrived by
lot. And gives so large privileges unto thi s casual election, that he appoints the children
proceeding from them to be brought up in the countrie; and those borne of the bad to be
banished and sent abroad. Notwithstanding if any of those so exiled shall by fortune
happen, while he is growing, to show some good hope of himself, that he may be
revoked and sent- for backe, and such amongst the first as shall in their youth give small
hope of future good to be banished. I see some that studie, plod, and glosse their
Almanackes, and in all accidents alleage their authority. A man were as good to say, they
must needs speak truth and lies. Quis est enim qui totum diem . jaculans, non aliquando
conlincet? ’For who is he that, shooting all day, sometimes hits not the white?’ I think not
the better of them, though what they say proove sometimes true. It were more certain, if
there were either a rule or a truth to lie ever. Seeing no man rec ordeth their fables,
because they are ordinary and infinit; and their predictions are made to be of credit,
because they are rare, incredible and prodigious; so answered Diagoras surnamed the
Atheist (being in Samothrace) to him, who in shewing him diver’s vows and offrings
hanging in the Temple, brought thither by such as had escaped shipwracke, said thus unto
him: ’You that think the Gods to have no care of humane things, what say you by so
many men saved by their grace and helpe?’ ’Thus is it done,’ answered he: ’Those which
were drowned far exceeding their number, are not here set-forth.’ Cicero says, That
amongst all other Philosophers that have avowed and acknowledged the Gods, only
Xenophanes the Colophonian has gone about to root out all manner of divination. It is so
much the less to be wondred at, if at any time we have seen some of our Princes mindes,
to their great damage, rely upon such like vanities. I would to God, I had with my own
eyes seen those two wonders, mentioned in the book of Ioachin the Abbat of Calabria,
who foretold all the Popes that should ensue, together with their names and shapes: And
that of Leo the Emperor, who fore-spake all the Emperors and Patriarkes of Greece. This
have I seen with my own eyes, that in public confusions, men amazed at their own
fortune, give themselves head-long, as it were to all manner of superstition, to search in
heaven the causes and ancient threats of their ill-lucke; and in my time are so strangely s
uccessefull therein, as they have persuaded me, that it is an ammusing of sharpe and idle
wits; that such as are inured to this subtletie, by folding and unfolding them, may in all
other writings be capable to find out what they seek-after. But above all, their dark,
ambiguous, fantastic, and propheticall, gibrish, mends the matter much, to which their

authors never give a plaine sense, that posterity may apply what mean ing and
construction it shall please unto it. The Dæmon of Socrates was perhaps a certain
impulsion or will, which without the advice of his discourse presented itself unto him. In
a mind so well purified, and by continuall exercise of wisdom and virtue so well
prepared, as his was, it is likely, his inclinations (though rash and inconsiderate) were ever
of great moment, and worthie to be followed. Every man feeleth in himself some image
of such agitations, of a prompt, vehement and casual opinion. It is in me to give them
some authority, that affoord so little to our wisdom. And I have had some, equally
weake in reason, and violent in persuasion and disswasion (which was more ordinary to
Socrates) by which I have so happily and so profitably suffred my self to be transported,
as they might perhaps be thought to containe some matter of divine inspiration.



Return to


CHAPTER XIl. OF CONSTANCIE






CHAPTER XIl. OF CONSTANCIE
HE law of resolution and constancy implieth not, we should not, as
much as lieth in o ur power shelter ourselves from the chiefes and
inconveniences that threaten us, nor by consequence fear, they should
surprise us. Contrariwise, all honest means for a man to warrant
himself from evils are not only tolerable, but commendable. And the
part of constancy is chiefly acted, in firmely bearing the
inconveniences, against which no remedie is to be found. So that there
is no nimblenesse of body, nor wealding of hand-weapons, that we will reject, if it may in
any sort defend us from the blow, meant at us. Many most warlike nations in their
conflicts and fights, used retreating and flight as a principal advantage, and showed their
backs to their enemy much more dangerously than their faces. The Turkes at this day
retaine something of that humor. And Socrates in Plato does mocke at Laches, because
he had defined fortitude, to keep herself steadie in her rancke against her enemies;
’What,’ says he, ’were it then cowardise to beat them in giving them place?’ And alleage
th Homer against him, who commendeth in æneas his skill in flying and giving ground.
And because Laches being better advised, avoweth that custom to be amongst the
Scithians, and generally amongst all horsemen, he alleageth further unto him the example

of the Lacedemonian footmen (a nation above all other used to fight on foot who in the
battle of Plateæ, to open and to put to rowt the Persian Phalanx, advised themselves to
scatter and put themselves backe, that so by the opinion of their flight, they might if they
should pursue them, rush in upon them, and put that so combined-masse to rout. By which
means they gained the victory. Touching the Scithians, it is reported, that when Darius
went to subdue them, he sent their King many reproachfull speeches, for so much as he
ever saw him retire and give ground before him, and to avoid the main battle. To whom
Indathirsez (for so was his name) answered, that ’They did it not for f eare of him, nor any
other man living, but that it was the fashion of his nation to march thus: as having neither
cities, nor houses, nor manured land to defend, or to fear their enemies should reape any
commoditie by them.’ But if he had so great a desire to feed on them, he might draw
nearer to view the place of their ancient Sepulchers, and there he should meet with whom
to speak his belly-full. Notwithstanding when a man is once within reach of cannonshot,
and as it were point-blancke befor e them, as the fortune of war does diverse times bring
men unto, it ill beseemeth a resolute mind to start-aside, or be daunted at the threat of a
shot, because by the violence and suddennesse thereof we deem it inevitable: and there
are some, who by lifting up of a hand, or stooping their head have sometimes given their
fellowes cause of laughter: yet have we seeene in the voyage, the Emperor Charles the
fifth made against us in Provence, the Marquis of Guasto, being gone out to survey the
citie of Arles, and shewn himself out of a winde- mill, under colour of which he was come
somewhat near the Town, he was discovered by the Lord of Bonevall, and the Seneshall
of Agenois, who were walking upon the Theatre Aux arenes (so called in French because
it is fall of sand) who shewing him to the Lord of Villiers, Commissarie of the Artillerie,
he mounted a culverin so levell, that had not the Marquis perceived the fire, and so
started aside, it was constantly affirmed, he had been shot th rough the body likewise
not many yeeres before, Lorence of Medici, Duke of Vrbin, and father to the Queene-
mother of France, besieging Mondolphe, a place in Italie, in the province named Vicariate,
seeing fire given to a piece that stood upright upon him, stooped his head, and well befell
him that he plaide the duck, for otherwise the bullet, which wenr right over, and within a
little of his head, had doubtlesse shot him through the paunch. But t o say truth, I will
never think these motions were made with discourse, for what judgement can you give of
an aime, either high or low, in a matter so sudden? It may rather be thought that fortune
favoured their fear: and which an other time might as well be a meane to make them fall
into the cannons-mouth, as to avoid the same. I cannot chuse, if the cracke of a musket
do suddenly streeke mine ears, in a place where I least looke for it, but I must needs
start at it: which I have seen ha ppen to men of better sort than myself. Nor do the
Stoices meane, that the Soule of their wisest man in any sort resist the first visions and
sudden fantasies, that surprise the same: but rather consent that, as it were unto a natural
subjection, he yields and shrinks unto the loud clattering and roare of heaven, or of some
violent downefall; for example-sake, unto palenesse, and contraction. So likewise in other
passions, alwayes provided, his opinion remaines safe and whole, and the situati on of his
reason, admit no tainting or alteration whatsoever: and he no whit consent to his fright
and sufferance. Touching the first part; the same happens to him, that is not wise, but far

otherwise concerning the second. For the impression of passions does not remaine
superficiall in him: but rather penetrates even into the secret of reason, infecting and
corrupting the same. He judgeth according to them and conformeth himself to them.
Consider precisely the state of the wise Stoice: Mens immota manet, lachrymæ volvuntur
inanes. His mind does firme remaine, Teares are distill’d in vain. the wise Peripatetike
does not exempt himself from perturbations of the mind, but does moderate them.



Return to


CHAPTER XIII: OF CEREMONIES IN THE ENTERVIEW OF KINGS






CHAPTER XIII: OF CEREMONIES IN THE ENTERVIEW OF KINGS
HERE is no subject so vain, that deserveth not a place in this rapsodie.
It were a notable discourtesy unto our common rules, both towards an
equa ll, but more toward a great person, not to meete with you in your
house, if he have once warned you that he will come: And Margaret
Queene of Navarre, was wont to say to this purpose, ’That it was a
kind of incivilitie in a gentleman, to depart from his house, as the
fashion is, to meet with him that is coming to him, how worthy
soever he be: and that it more agrees with civilitie and respect, to stay for him at home,
and there to entertain him: except it were for fear the stranger should misse his way: and
that it sufficeth to companie and wait upon him, when he is going away again.’ As for me,
I oftentimes forget these vain offices; as one that endevoureth to abolish all manner of
ceremonies in my house. Some will be offended at it, what can I do withall? I had rather
offend a stranger once, than my self everie day; for it were a continuall subjection. To
what end do men avoid the servitude of Courts, and entertaine the same in their own
houses? Moreover it is a common rule in all assemblies, that he who is the meaner man,
commeth first to the place appointed, forasmuch as it belongs to the better man to be stayed-

for and waited upon by the other. Nevertheless we saw that at the enterview, prepared at
Merceilles betweene Pope Clement the seventh, and Francis the first, King of France, the
King having appointed all necessarie preparation, went him-self out of the Town, and
gave the Pope two or three dayes leisure, to make his entrie into it, and to refresh
himself, before he would come to meet him there. Likewise at the meeting of the said
Pope with the Emperor at Bologna, the Emperor gave the Pope advantage and leisure to
be first there, and afterward came himself. It is (say they) an ordinary ceremony at enter-
parlies betweene such Princes, that the better man should ever come first to the place
appointed indeed before him in whose countrey the assembly is and they take it in this sence,
tha t it is, because this complement should testifie, he is the better man, whom the meaner
goeth to seek, and that he sueth unto him. Not only each countrey, but every City, indeed,
and every vocation has his own particular decorum I have very carefully been brought
up in mine infancie, and have lived in very good company, because I would not be
ignorant of the good maners of our countrey of France, and I am persuaded I might keep
a schoole of them. I love to follow them, but not so cowardly, as my life remaine thereby
in subjection. They have some painfull formes in them, which if a man forget by
discretion, and not by error, he shall no whit be disgraced. I have often seen men
proove unmanerly by too much maners, and importunate by over-much courtesy. The
knowledge of entertainment is otherwise a profitable knowledge. It is, as grace and
beautie are, the reconciler of the first accoastings of society and familiarity: and by
consequence, it openeth the entrance to instruct us by the example of others, and to exploit
and produce our example, if it have any instructing or communicable thing in it.



Return to


CHAPTER XIV: MEN ARE PUNISHED BY TO MUCH OPINIONATING
THEMSELVES IN A PLACE WITHOUT REASON






CHAPTER XIV: MEN ARE PUNISHED BY TO MUCH OPINIONATING
THEMSELVES IN A PLACE WITHOUT REASON
ALOUR has his limits, as other vertues have: which if a man out-go, he shall find
himself in the traine of vice: in such sort, that unless a man know their right
bounds, which in truth are not on a sudden easily hit upon, he may fall into
rashnesse, obstinacy and folly. For this consideration grew the custom we hold in
wars, to punish, and that with death, those who wilfully opiniate themselves to
defend a place, which by the rules of war cannot be kept. Otherwise upon hope of
impunitie, there should be no cottage that might not entertaine an Armie. The Lord
Constable Momorancie at the siege of Pavia, having been appointed to pass over the river Tesine, and
to quarter himself in the suburbs of Saint Antonie, being impeached by a tower that stood at the end of
the bridge. and which obstinately would needs hold out, indeed to be battered, caused all those that
were with-in it, to be hanged. The same man afterward, accompanying my Lord the Dolphin of France
in his iourney beyond the Alpes, having by force taken the Castle Villane, and all those that were within
the same, having by the fury of the Soldiers bin put to the sword, except the Captain, and his Ancient,
for the same reason, caused them both to be hanged and strangled: As did also Captain Mart in du
Bellay, the Governour of Turin, in the same conntrey, the Captain of Saint Bony: all the rest of his men

having been massacred at the taking of the place. But forasmuch as the judgement of the strength or
weaknesse of the place is taken by the estimate and counterpoise of the forces that assaile it (for som
might justly opinionate himself against two culverins, that wold play the mad-man to expect thirty
cannons) where also the greatness of the Prince conquering must be considered, his reputation, and the
rest that is due unto him: there is danger a man should somewhat bend the balance on that side. By
which termes it happens, that some have so great an opinion of themselves, and their means, and
deeming it unreasonable, anything should be worthie to make head against them, that so long as their
fortune continueth, they overpasse what hill or difficultie soever they find to withstand or resist them:
As is seen by the formes of sommonings and challenges, that the Princes of the East, and their
successors yet remaining, have in use, so fierce, so haughtie and so full of a barbarous kind of
commandement. And in those places where the Portugales abated the pride of the Indians, they found
some states observing this universall and inviolalile law, that what enemy soever he be, that is
overcome by the King in person, or by his Lieutenant, is exempted from all composition of ransome or
mercy. So above all, a man who is able should take heed, lest he fall into the hands of an enemy-judge,
that is victorious and armed.



Return to


CHAPTER XV: OF THE PUNISHMENT OF COWARDISE






CHAPTER XV: OF THE PUNISHMENT OF COWARDISE
HAVE heretofore heard a Prince, who was a very great Captain, hold
opinion, that a souldier might not for cowardise of heart be condemned
to death: who, sitting at his table heard report of the Lord of Vervins’
sentence, who for yielding up of Bollein, was doomed to lose his head.
Verily there is reason a man should make a difference bet ween faults
proceeding from our weaknesses and those that grow from our malice.
For in the latter we are directly bandied against the rules of reason, which nature has
imprinted in us; and in the former, it seems, we may call the same nature, as a warrant,
because it has left us in such imperfection and defect. So as diverse nations have judged
that no man should blame us for anything we do against our conscience. And the opinion
of those which condemne heretikes and miscreants unto capital punishments, is partly
grounded upon this rule: and the same which establisheth, that a Judge or an Advocate
may not be called to account for any matter, committed in their charge through oversight
or ignorance. But touching cowardise, it is certain the common fashion is, to punish the
same with ignominie and shame. And some hold that this rule was first put in practice by
the Law-giver Charondas, and that before him the laws of Greece were wont to punish
those with death, who for fear did run a way from a Battell: where he only ordained,

that for three dayes together, clad in womens attire, they should be made to sit in the
market-place: hoping yet to have some service at their hands, and by means of this
reproch, they might recover their courage again. Suffundere malis hominis sanguinem
quam effundere: ’Rather move a man’s blood to blush in his face, than remove it by
bleeding from his body.’ It appeareth also t hat the Roman laws did in former times
punish such as had run away by death. For Ammius Marcellinus reporteth, that Iulian the
Emperor condemned ten of his Souliliers, who in a charge against the Parthians, had but
turned their backs from it; first to be degraded, then to suffer death, as he says, according
to the ancient laws, who nevertheless, condemneth others for a like fault, under the
ensigne of bag and baggage, to be kept amongst the common prisoners. The sharp
punishment of the Romans against those Soldiers that escaped from Cannæ: and in the
same war against those that accompanied Cn. Fulvius in his defeat, reached not unto
death, yet may a man fear, such open shame may make them despaire, and not only
prove faint and cold friends, but cruel and sharpe enemies. In the time of our forefathers,
the Lord of Franget, whilom Lieutenant of the Marshall of Chastillions company, having
by the Marshall of Chabanes been placed Governor of Fontarabie, in stead of the Earle of
Lude and having yielded the same unto the Spaniards, was condemned to be degraded of
all Nobilitie, and not only himself, but all his succeeding posterity declared villains and
clownes, taxable and incapable to bear arms; which severe sentence was put in
execution at Lyons. The like punishment did afterward all the Gentlemen suffer, that were
within Guise, when the Earle of Nansaw enired the town: and others since. Nevertheless
if there were so grosse an ignorance, and so apparent cowardize, as that it should exceed
all ordinary, it were reason it should be taken for a sufficient proofe of inexcusable
treacherier and knaverie, and for such to be punished.

Renascence
Editions

Return to


CHAPTER XVI: A TRICKE OF CERTAINE AMBASSADORS





 Send comments and corrections to the
CHAPTER XVI: A TRICKE OF CERTAINE AMBASSADORS
IN all my travels I did ever observe this custom, that is, alwaies to
learne something by the communication of others (which is one of the
best schooles that may be) to reduce those I confer withall to speak of
that wherein they are most conversant and skilfull.
Basti al nocch iero ragionar de’ venti,
Albifolco de’ tori, e le sue piaghe
Conti ’l guerrier, conti ’l pastor gl’ armenti.-- Idem PROPERT. ii. El. i. 43.
Sailers of winds plow-men of beasts take keep,
Let Soldiers count their woundes, shepherds their sheepe.
For commonly we see the contrary, that many chuse rather to discourse of any other trade
than their own; supposing it to be so much new reputation gotten: witnes the quip
Archidamus gave Periander, saying that he forsooke the credit of a good Physitian, to

become a paltry Poet. Note but how Cæsar displaieth his inventiton at large, when he
would have us conceive his inventions how to build bridges, and devices, how to frame
other war-like engins; and in respect of that how close and succinct he writes, when he
speaks of the offices belonging to his profession, of his valor, and of the conduct of his
war-fare. His exploits prove him a most excellent Captain, but he would be known for a
skilfull Ingenier, a quality somewhat strange in him. Dionysius the elder was a very great
chieftaine and Leader in war, as a thing best fitting his fortune; but be greatly laboured
by means of Poetry, to assume high commendation unto himself, howbeit he had but
little skill in it. A certain Lawier was not long since brought to see a study, stored with all
manner of bookes, both of his own, and of all other faculties, wherein he found no
occasion to entertaine him self withal, but like a foolish cunning clarke earnestly busied
himself to glosse and censure a fence or a barricado, placed over the screw of the study,
which a hundred Captains and Soldiers see everie day, without obsererving or taking
offence at them.
Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus. --Hor. i. Epist. xiv. 43.
The Oxe would trappings weare,
The Horse, ploughs-yoake would bear.
By this course you never come to perfection, or bring any thing to good pass. Thus m ust
a man endeavor to induce the Architect, the Painter, the Shoemaker, to speak of their
own trade, and so of the rest, every man in his vocation. And to this purpose am I wont,
in reading of histories (which is the subject of most men) to consider who are the writers:
If they be such as professe nothing but bare learning, the chief thing I learne in them, is
their stile and language: if Physitians, I believe them in whatsoever they shall report
concerning the temperatenesse of the aire, the h ealth and complexion of Princes, or of
hurts and infirmities: If Lawiers, we should observe the controversies of rights, titles, and
pretenses of laws and customs, the establishment of policies, and such like things: If
Divines, we may note the affairs of the Church, the Ecclesiasticall censures,
dispensations, cases of conscience, and marriages: If Courtiers, manners, complements,
ceremonies, and entertainments: If Warriors, what belongs unto their charge, but chiefly
the managing and conduc t of the achievements or exploits wherein they have been
themselves in person: If Ambassadors, the negotiations, intelligences, practices, policies,
and manner how to direct, complot, and conduct them. And therefore what in another
Writer I should perhaps have cursorie passed over, I have with some advisednesse
considered and marked the same in the historie of the Lord of Langley, a man most expert
and intelligen t in such matters: which is, that after he had exactly set down and declared
those glorious, and far- fetcht remonstrances of the Emperor Charles the fifth made in
the consistorie of Rome, in the presence of the Bishop of Mascon, and the Lord of Velly,
our Ambassadors; wherein he entermixed many bitter and outrageous words against us;
and amongst others, that if his Captains and Soldiers were not of much more
faithfulnesse and sufficiencie in the art of war than our Kings, he would forthwith tie a

rope about his necke, and go aske him mercy: whereof he seemed to believe something:
for afterward while he lived, he chanced twice or thrice to utter the very same words.
Moreover, that he had challenged the King to fight with him, man to man in his shirt, with
Rapier and dagger in a boat. The said Lord of Langey, following his story addeth that the
said Ambassadors making a dispatch of what had passed unto the King, dissembled the
chiefest part unto him, indeed concealed the two pr ecedent articles from him. Now me
thought it very strange, that it should lie in the power of an Ambassador to dispence with
any point, concerning the advertizements he should give unto his Master, namely of such
consequence, coming from such a person, and spoken in so great an assembly, whereas
me seemed it should have been the office of a trustie servant, truly and exactly to set
down thin as they were, and in what manner they had succeeded: to the end the liberty of
disposing, judging and ch using, might wholly lie in the master. For to alter and conceal
the truth from him, for fear he should conster and take it other than he ought, and lest that
might provoke him to some had resolution; and in the meanewhile to suffer him to be
ignorant of his own affairs, me thought should rather have appertained to him that
gives the law, than to him that receiveth the same; the Master or overseer of the schools,
and not to him who should think himself inferior, as well in authority as in wisdom and
good counsell. Howsoever it were, I would be loth be so used in my own small and
particular business, we do so willingly upon every slight occasion and pretence neglect
and forgoe commandement, and are so far from obeying, that we rather usurp a kind of
mastery and free power: every man does so naturally aspire unto liberty and authority,
that no profit ought to be so dear unto a superior, proceeding from those that serve him as
their simple and natural obedience. Whosoever obeyeth by discretion, and not by
subjection, corrupteth and abuseth the office of commanding. And P. Crassus he whom
the Romans deemed five times happy, when he was Consull in Asia, having sent a
Graecian Inginer, to bring the greatest of two ship-masts before him, which he had seen
in Athens, therewith to frame an engine of battery: This man under colour of his skill,
presumed to do otherwise than he was bidden, and brought the lesser of the two masts
which according to his arts reason he deemed the fittest. Crassus having patiently heard
his reasons and allegations, caused him to be well whipped; preferring the interest of true
discipline, before that of the work. On the other side a man might also consider, that this
so strict obedience belongs but to precise and prefixed commandements. Ambassadors
have a more scopefull and free charge, which in many points dependeth chiefly of their
disposition. They do not meerely execute, but frame and direct by their own advice and
counsell, the will of their Master. I have in dayes seen some persons of commandement,
checked and found fault withall, because they had rather obeyed the literall sense, and
bare words of the Kings letters, than the occasions of the affairs they had in hand. Men of
understanding and experience do yet at this daye condemne the custom of the Kings of
Persia, which was to mince the instructions given to their Agents, and Lieutenants so
small, that in the least accident they might have recourse to their directions and
ordinainces: This delay, in so far reaching a scope of domination, having often brought
great prejudice, and notable dammage unto their affairs. And Crassus writing unto a man
of that profession and advertizing him of the use whereto he purp osed the foresaid mast;

seems he not to enter into conference with him concerning his determination, and wish
him to interpose his censure or advice of it.



Return to


CHAPTER XVII: OF FEARE





 Send comments and corrections to the
CHAPTER XVII: OF FEARE
Obstupui, steteruntque comæ, et vox faucibus hæsit. -- 1 VIRG. æn. 1. ii.
774.
I stood agast, my hair on end,
My jaw-tide tongue no speech would lead.
AM no good Naturalist (as they say and I know not well by what
springs fear does work in us: but well I wot it is a strange passion:
and as Physitian s say, there is none does sooner transport our
judgement out of his due seat. Verily I have seen diverse become mad
and senselesse for fear: indeed in him, who is most settled and best
resolved, it is certain that while his fit continueth, it begetteth many
strange dazelings, and terrible amazements in him. I omit to speak of the vulgar sort, to
whom it sometimes representeth strange apparitions, as their fathers and grandfathers
ghosts, risen out of their graves, and in their winding sheets: and to others it sometimes

sheweth Larves, Hobgoblins, Robbin-good-fellowes, and such other Bugbeares and
Chimeræs. But even amongst Soldiers, with whom it ought to have no credit at all, how
often has she changed a flocke of sheep into a troupe of armed men? Bushes and shrubs
into men at- arms and officiers? our friends into our enemies? and a red crosse into a
white? At what time the Duke of Bourbon took Rome, an Ancient that kept sentinell in
the borough Saint Peter, was at the first alarm surprised with such terror, that with his
colours in his hand he suddenly threw himself through the hole of a breach out of the
City, and just in the midst of hisenemies, supposing the way to go straight in the heart of
the City: but in the end he no sooner perceived the Duke of Bourbons troupes advancing
to withstand him, imagining it to be some sallie the Citizens made that way, he better
bethinking himself, turned head, and the very same way he came out, he went into the
town again, which was more than three hundred paces distance towards the fields. The
like happened, but not so successfully, unto Captain Iulle his ensigne-bearer at what time
Saint Paul was taken from us by the Earle of Bures, and the Lord of Reu, who was so
frighted with fear, that going about to cast himself over the town wals, with his
Ancient in his hand, or to creepe through a spike-hole, he was cut in peeces by the
assailants. At which siege likewise, that horror and fear is very memorable, which so did
cboake, seize upon, and freeze the heart of a gentleman, that having received no hurt at
all, he fell down stark dead upon the ground before the breach. The like passion rage
does sometimes possesse a whole multitude. In one of the encounters that Germanicus had
with the Germanes, two mightie troupes were at one instant so frighted with fear, that
both betooke themselves to their heels, and ran awa y two contrary ways, the one right
to that place whence the other fled. It sometimes addeth wings unto our heels, as unto the
first named, and other times it takes the use of feet from us: as we may read of
Theophilus the Emperor, who in a battle he lost against the Agarens, was so amazed and
agonied, that he could not resolve to scape away by flight: adeo pavor etiam auxilia
formidat; ’Fear is so afraid even of that should help;’ Untill such time as Manuel, one of
the chief leaders in his army, having rouzed and shaken him, as it were out of a dead
sleepe, said unto him, ’Sir, if you will not presently follow me, I will surely kill you, for
better were it you should lose your life, than being taken prisoner, lose your Empire and
all.’ Then does she show the utmost of her power, when for her own service, she calls us
off unto valor, which it has exacted from our duty and honor. In t he first set battle, the
Romans lost against Hanibal, under the Consul Sempronius, a troupe of well-nigh ten
thousand footmen was so surprised with fear, that seeing no other way to take, nor by
what other course to give their basenes free passage, they headlong bent their flight
toward the thickest and strongest squadron of their enemies, which with such fury it
rowted and slew a great number of the Carthaginians: purchasing a reproachfull and
disgraceful flight, at the same rate it might have gained a most glorious victory. It is fear
I stand most in fear of. For, in sharpnesse it surmounteth all other accidents. What
affecfion can be more violent and just than that of Pompeyes friends, who in his own
ship were spectators of that horrible massacre? yet is it, that the fear of the ægyptian
sailes, which began to approach them, did in such sort daunt and skare them, that some
have noted, they only busied themselves to hasten the marriners to make what speed they

could and by main strength of oares to save themselves, until such time, as being arrived
at Tyre, and that they were free from fear, they had leisure to bethinke themselves of
their late loss, and give their plaints and tears free passage, which this other stronger
passion had suspended and hindred.
Tum pavor sapientiam omnem mihi ex animo expectorat.-- CIC. Tusc. Qu.
1. iv. ex Enn.; De Orat. 1. iii.
Fear then unbreasts all wit,
That in my mind did sit.
Those who in any skirmish or sudden bickering of warr e have been throughly skared,
fore-hurt, wounded, and gored as they be, are many times the next day after brought to
charge again. But such as have conceived a true fear of their enemies, it is hard for you
to make them looke them in the face again. Such as are in continuall fear to lose their
goods, to be banished, or to be subdued, live in incessant agonie and languor; and
thereby often lo se both their drinking, their eating, and their rest. Whereas the poore, the
banished, and seely servants, live often as carelesly and as pleasantly as the other. And so
many men, who by the impatience and urging of fear, have hanged, drowned, and
headlong tumbled down from some rocke, have plainly taught us, that fear is more
importunate and intolerable than death. The Græcians acknowledge another kind of it,
which is beyond the error of our discourse: proceeding, as they say without any ap parent
cause, and from an heavenly impulsion. Whole Nations and Armies are often seen
surprised with it. Such was that which brought so wonderful a desolation to Carthage,
where nothing was heard but lamentable outcries and frightfull exclamations: the
inhabitants were seen desperately to run out of their houses, as to a sudden alarm, and
furiously to charge, hurt, and enter-kill one another, as if they had been enemies come to
usurpe and possesse their City. All things were there in a disordered confusion, and in a
confused fury, until such time as by praiers and sacrifices they had appeased the wrath of
their Gods. They call it to this day, the Panike terror.



Return to


CHAPTER XVIII: THAT WE SHOULD NOT JUDGE OF OUR HAPPINESSE
UNTILL AFTER OUR DEATH






CHAPTER XVIII: THAT WE SHOULD NOT JUDGE OF OUR HAPPINESSE
UNTILL AFTER OUR DEATH
-- scilicet ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini est, dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaquefun era debet. --OVID. Met. 1. iii. 135.
We must expect of man the latest day
Nor ere he die, he’s happie, can we say.
HE very children are acquainted with the story of Croesus to this
purpose: who being taken by Cyrus, and by him condemned to die,
upon the point of his execution, cried out aloud: ’Oh Solon, Solon!’
which words of his, being reported to Cyrus; who inquirug what be
meant by them, told him, he now at his own cost verified the
advertisement Solon had before times given him; which was, that no
man, what cbeerefull and blandishing countenance soever fortune
showed them may rightly deem himself happie, till such time as he have passed the last

day of his life, by reason of the uncertaintie and vicissitude of humane things, which by a
very light motive, and slight occasion, are often changed from one to another cleane
contrary state and degree. And therefore Agesilaus answered one that counted the King of
Persia happy, because being very young the garland of so mightie and great a dominion:
’indeed but said he, Priam at the same age was not unhappy.’ Of the Kings of Macedon that
succeeded Alexander the Great, some were afterward seen to become Joyners and
Scriveners at Rome: and of Tyrants of Sicilie, School-masters at Corinth. One that had
conquered halfe the world, and been Emperor over so many Armies, became an humble
and miserable suter to the raskally officers of a king of ægypte: At so high a rate did that
great Pompey purchase the irkesome prolonging of his life but for five or six moneths.
And in our fathers days, Lodowicke Sforze, tenth Duke of Milan under whom the State
of Italie had so long been turmoiled and shaken, was seen to die a wretched prisoner at
Loches in France, but not till he had lived and lingered ten years in thraldom, which was
the worst of his bargaine. The fairest Queene, wife to the greatest King of Christendome,
was she not lately mene to die by the hands of an executioner? Oh unworthie and
barbarous crueltie! And a thousand such examples. For, it seems that as the sea-billowes
and surging waves, rage and storme against the Burly pride and stubborne height of our
buildings, so are there above, certain spirits that envie the rising prosperities and
greatneme here below.
Vsque adeo res humanas vis abdita quædam
Obterit, et pulchros fasces sævasque secures
Proculcare, ac ludibrio sibi habere videtur. -- 1 LUCRET. 1. v. 1243.
A hidden power so mens states has out-worne
Faire swords, fierce scepters, signes of honors borne,
It seems to trample and deride in scorne.
And it seems Fortune does sometimes narrowly watch the last day of our life, thereby to
show her power, and in one moment to overthrow what for many years together she had
been erecting, and makes us cry after Laberius, Nimirum hac die undi plus vixi, mihi quam
vivendum fuit Thus it is, ’I have lived longer by this one day than I should.’ So may that
good advice of Solon be taken with reason. But forasmuch as he is a Philosopher, with
whom the favors or disfavours of fortune, and good or in lucke have no place, and are
not regarded by him; and puissances and greatnesses, and accidents of quality, are well-
nigh indifferent: I deem it very likely he had a further reach, and meant that the same
good fortune of our life, which dependeth of the tranquillitie and contentment of a
welborne mind, and of the resolution and assurance of a well ordered soul, should never
be ascribed unto man, until he have been seen play the last act of his comedie and
without doubt the hardest. In all the rest there may be some maske: either these
sophisticall discourses of Philosophie are not in us bat by countenance, or accidents that
never touch us to the quick, give us alwaies leisure to keep our countenance setled. But
when that last part, of death, and of ourselves comes to be acted, when no dissembling

will avail, then is it high time to speak plaine_English, and put off all vizards: then
whatsoever the pot containeth must be shewne, be it good or had, foul or cleane, wine or
water.
Nam veræ voces tum demum pectore ab imo
Ejiciuntur, et eripitur persona, manet res. -- 1 LUCRET. 1. iii 57.
For then are sent true speeches from the heart,
We are oursel ves, we leave to play a part.
See here, why at this last cast, all our lives other actions must be tride and touched. It is
the masterday, the day that judgeth all others: it is the day, says an auncient Writer, that
must judge of all my forepassed years, To death do I refer the essay of my studies
fruit. There shall we see whether my discourse proceed from my heart, or from my
mouth. I have seen diverse, by their death, either in good or evil, give reputation to all
their forepass ed life. Scipio, father-in-law to Pompey, in well dying, repaired the ill
opinion which until that hour men had ever held of him. Epaminondas being demanded
which of the three he esteemed most, either Chabrias, or Iphicrates, or himself: ’It is
necessary,’ said he, ’that we be seen to die, before your question may well be resolved.’
Verily, we should steale much from him, if he should be weighed without the honor and
greatness of his end. God has willed it, as he pleased: but in my time three of the most
execrable persons that ever I knew in all abomination of life, and the most infamous have
been seen to die very orderly and quietly, and in every circumstance composed even
unto perfection. There are some brave and fortunate deaths. I have seen her cut the twine
of some man’s life, with a progresse of wonderful advancement, and with so worthie an
end, even in the flowre of his growth and spring of h is youth, that in mine opinion, his
ambitious and haughty couragious designes, thought nothing so high as might interrupt
them: who without going to the place where he pretended , arived there more gloriously
and worthily than either his desire or hope aimed at, and by his fall forewent the power
and name whither by his course he aspired. When I judge of other men’s lives, I ever
respect how they have behaved themselves in their end; and my chiefest study is, I may
well demeane myself at my last gasp, that is to say, quietly and constantly.



Return to


CHAPTER XIX: THAT TO PHILOSOPHIZE IS TO LEARNE HOW TO DIE






CHAPTER XIX: THAT TO PHILOSOPHIZE IS TO LEARNE HOW TO DIE
ICERO says, that to Philosophise is no other thing than for a man to
prepare himself to death: which is the reason that studie and
contemplation does in some sort withdraw our soul from us and
severally employ it from the body, which is a kind of apprentisage and
resemblance of death; or else it is, that all the wisdom and discourse of
the world, does in the end resolve upon this point, to teach us not to
fear to die. Truly either reason mockes us, or it only aimeth at our contentment, and in
fine, bends all her travell to make us live well, and as the holy Scripture, says, ’at our
ease.’ All the opinions of the world conclude, that pleasure is our end, howbeit they take
diverse means unto and for it, else would men reject them at their first coming. For, who
would give eare unto him, that for it’s end would establish our pain and disturbance? The
dissentions of philosophicall sects in this case are verbal: Transcurramus solertissimas
nugas;1 ’Let us run over such over-fine fooleries and subtill trifles.’ There is more
wilfulnesse and wrangling among them, than pains to a sacred profession. But what
person a man undertakes to act, he does ever therewithal personate his own. Allthough
they say, that in virtue itself, the last scope of our aime is voluptuousnes. It pleaseth me
to importune their ears still with this word, which so much offends their bearing. And if

it imply any chief pleasure or exceeding contentment, it is rather due to the assistance of
virtue, than to any 1. SEN. Epist. 117.other supply, voluptuousnes being more strong,
sinnowie, sturdie. and manly, is but more seriously voluptuous. And we should give it the
name of pleasure, more favorable, sweeter, and more natural; and not terme it vigor, from
which it has his denomination. Should this baser sen suality deserve this fair name, it
should be by competencie and not by privilege. I find it less void of incommodities and
crosses than virtue. And besides that, her taste is more fleeting,. momentarie, and fading,
she has her fasts, her eves and her travels, and both sweat and blood. Furthermore she
has particularly so many wounding passions, and of so severall sorts, and so filthie and
loathsome a societie waiting upon her, that she is equivalent to penitencie. We are in the
wrong, to think her incommodities serve her as a provocation and seasoning to her
sweetues, as in nature one contrary is vivified by another contrary: and to say, when we
come to virtue, that like succeses and difficulties overwhelme it, and yield it austere and
inaccessible. Whereasmuch more properly then unto voluptuousness they ennobled
sharpen, animate, and raise that divine and perfecte pleasure which it meditates and
procureth us. Truly he is very unworthie her acquaintance, that counter-ballancet h her
cost to his friut, and knowes neither the graces nor use of it. Those who go about to
instruct us, how her pursuit is very hard and laborious, and her iovisance well-pleasing
and delightfull: what else tell they us, but that she is ever unpleasant and irksome? For,
what humane meane did ever attaine unto an absolute enjoying of it? The perfectest have
been content but to aspire and approach her, without ever possessing her. But they are
deceived; seeing that of all the pleasures we know, the pursute of them is pleasant. The
enterprise is perceived by the quality of the thing, which it has regard unto: for it is a
good portion of the effect, and consubstantiall. That happines and felicitie which shineth
in virtue, replenishet her approaches and appurtenances, even unto the first entrance and
utmost barre. Now of all the benefits of virtue, the contempt of the contempt of death is
the chiefest, a meane that furnisheth our life with an ease-full tranquillitie and gives us a
pure and amiable taste of it: without which every other voluptuousnes is extinguished.
See, here the reasons why and all rules encounter and agree with this article. And albeit
they all leade us with a common accord to despise grife, povertie, and other accidentall
crosses, to which man’s life is subject, it is not with an equall care: as well because
accidents are not of such a necessitie for most men pass their whole life without feeling
any wan t or povertier and othersome without feeling any grief or sicknes, as Xenophilus
the Musitian, who lived an hundred and six years in perfect and continuall health: as also
if the worst happen, death may at all times, and whensoever it shall please us, cut off all
other inconveniences and crosses. But as for death, it is inevitable.
Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium
Versatur urna, serius, ocius
Sors exitura, et nos in æter-
num Exilium impositura cymbæ -- 1 HOR. l. iii. Od. iii. 25.
All to one place are driv’n, of all

Shak’t is the lot-pot, where-hence shall
Sooner or later drawns lots fall,
And to deaths boat for aye enthrall.
And by consequence, if she makes us affeard, it is a continual subject of torment, and
which can no way be eased. There is no starting-hole will hide us from her, she will find
us wherever we are, we may as in a suspected countrie start and turn here and there:
quæ quasi saxum Tantalo semper impendet (Cic. De Fin. 1) ’Which evermore hangs like
the stone over the head of Tantalus:’ Our laws do often condemne and send malefactors
to be executed in the same place where the crime was committed: to which while they
are going, leade them along the fairest houses, or entertaine them with the best cheere you
can,
non Siculæ dapes
Dulcem elaborabunt saporem:
Non avium, citharæque cantus
Somnum reducent -- 1 HOR. 1. iii. Od. i. 18.
Not all King Denys daintie fare,
Can pleasing taste for them prepare
No song of birds, no musikes sound
Can lullabie to sleepe profound.
Doe you think they can take any pleasure in it? or be any thing delighted? and that the
finall intent of their voiage being still before their eyes, has not altered and altogether
distracted their taste from all these commodities and allurements?
Audit iter, numeratgue dies, spatioque viarum
Metitur vitam, torquetur peste futura. -- CLAUD. in Ruff. 1. ii. i. 137.
2 He heares his journey, counts his days, so measures he
His life by his waies length, vext with the ill shall be.
The end of our cariere is death, it is the necessarie object of our aime: if it affright us, how
is it possible we should step one foot forther without an ague? The remedie of the vulgar
sort is, not to think on it. But from what brutal stupidity may so grosse a blindnesse come
upon him? he must be made to bridle his Asse by the tail,
Qui capite ipse suo instituit vestigia retro. -- 3 LUCRET. 1. iv. 474.
Who does a course contrary run
With his head to his course begunne.

It is no marvell if he be so often taken tripping some do no sooner hear the name of
death spoken of, but they are afraid, indeed the most part will crosse themselves, as if they
heard the Devill named. And because mention is made of it in mens wills and testaments,
I warrant you there is none will set his hand to them, til the physician has given his last
doom, and utterly forsaken him. And God knowes, being then betweene such pain and
fear, with what sound judgment they endure him. For so much as this syllable sounded so
unpleasantly in their ears, and th is voice seemed so ill-boding and unlucky, the Romans
had learned to allay and dilate the name by a Periphasis. In liew of saying, he is dead, or
he has ended his days, they would say, he has lived. So it be life, be it past or no, they
are comforted: from whom we have borrowed our phrases quondam, alias, or late such a
one. It may perhaps be, as the common saying is, the time we live is worth the money we
pay for it. I was borne betweene eleven of the clocke and noone, the last of Februarie 1
533, according to our computation, the yeare beginning the first of Januarie. It is but a
fortnight since I was 39 years old. I want at least as much more. If in the meane time I
should trouble my thoughts with a matter so far from me, it were but folly. But what?
we see both young and old to leave their life after one self-same condition. No man
departs otherwise from it, than if he but now came to it, seeing there is no man so crazed,
bedrell, or decrepit, so long as he remembers Methusalem, but thinkes he may yet live
twentie years. Moreover, seely creature as you are, who has limited the end of your
days? Happily you presumest upon physicians reports. Rather consider the effect and
experience. By the common course of things long since you livest by extraordinarie
favor. Thou hast alreadie over-past the ordinary tearmes of common life: And to prove
it, remember but your acquaintances, and tell me how many more of them have died before
they came to your age, than have eithe r attained or outgone the same: indeed, and of those that
through renoune have ennobled their life, if you but register them, I will lay a wager, I
will find more that have died before they came to five and thirty years, than after. It is
consonant with reason and pietie, to take example by the humanity of Jesus Christ, who
ended his humane life at three and thirty years. The greatest man that ever was being no
more than a man, I meane Alexander the Great, ended his dayes, and died also of that
age. How many severall means and waies has death to surprise us!
Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis
Cautum est in horas. -- 1 HOR. 1. ii. Od. xiii. 13.
A man can never take good heed,
Hourely what he may shun and speed.
I omit to speak of agues and pleurisies; who would ever have imagined that a Duke of
Brittanie should have been stifled to death in a throng of people, as whilome was a
neighbour of mine at Lyons, when Pope Clement made his entrance there? Hast you not
seen one of our late Kings slain in the middest of his sports? and one of his ancestors
die miserably by the chocke of an hog? Eschilus fore- threatned by the fall of an house,

when he stood most upon his guard, strucken dead by the fall of a tortoise shell, which fell
out of the tallants of a eagle flying in the air? and another choked with the kernel of a
grape? And an Emperor die by the scratch of a combe, while he was combing his head?
And Aemylius Lepidus with hitting his foot against a doore-seele? Add Aufidius with
stumbling against the Consull-chamber doore as he was going in thereat? And Cornelius
Gallus, the Prætor, Tigillinus, Captain of the Roman watch, Lodowike, son of Guido
Gonzaga, Marquis of Mantua, end their days betweens womens thighs? And of a far
worse example Speusippus, the Platonian philosopher, and one of our Popes? Poore
Bebius a judge, while he demurreth the sute of a plaintife but for eight days, behold his
last expired: And Caius Iulius a Physitian, while he was aniointing the eyes of one of his
patients, to have his own sight closed for ever by death. And if amongst these examples, I
may adde one of a brother of mine, called Captam Saint Martin, a man of three and
twentie years of age, who had alreadie given good testimony of his worth and forward
valor, playing at tennis, received a blow with a ball, that hit him a little above the right
eare, without appearance of any contusion, bruse, or hurt, and never sitting or resting upon
it, died within six hours after of an apoplexie, which the blow of the ball caused in him.
These so frequent and ordinary examples, hapning, and being still before our eyes, how is
it possible for man to forgo or forget the remembrance of death? and why should it not
continually seem unto us, that she is still ready at hand to take us by tth throat? What
matter is it, will you say unto me, how and in what manner it is, so long as a man do not
trouble and vex himself therewith? I am of this opinion, that however a man may
shrowd or hide himself from her dart, indeed, were it under an oxe-hide, I am not the man
would shrinke backe: it sufficeth me to live at my ease; and the best recreation I can have,
that do I ever take; in other matters, as little vain glorious, and exemplare as you list.
-- prætulerim delirus inersque v ideri,
Dum mea delectent mala me, vel dinique fallant,
Quam sapere et ringi. -- 1 HOR. 1. ii. Epist. ii. 126.
A dotard I had rather seem, and dull,
Sooner my faults may please make me a gull,
Than to be wise, and beat my vexed scull.
But it is folly to think that way to come unto it. They come, they go, they trot, they
daunce: but no speech of death. All that is good sport. But if she be once come, and on a
sudden openly surprise, either them, their wives, their children, or their friends’, what
torments, what outcries, what rage, and what despaire does then overwhelme them? saw
you ever anything so drooping, so changed, and so distracted? A man must looke to it, and
in better times fore-see it. And might that brutish carelessenesse lodge in the mind of a
man of understanding (which I find altogether impossible) she sels us her ware at an
overdeere rate: were she an enemy by mans wit to be avoided, I would advise men to
borrow the weapons of cowardlinesse: but since it may not be, and that be you either a
coward or a runaway, an honest or valiant man, she overtakes you,

Nempe et fugacem persequitur virum,
Nec parcit imbellis juventæ
Poplitibus, timidoque tergo. -- HOR. 1. iii.Od. ii. 14.
Shee persecutes the man that flies,
Shee spares not weake youth to surprise,
But on their hammes and backe turn’d plies.
And that no temper of curace may shield or defend you,
Ille licet ferro cautus se condat et ære,
Mors tamen inclusum protrahet inde caput. -- PROPERT. 1. iii. et xvii. 25.
2 Though he with yron and brasse his head empale,
Yet death his head enclosed thence with hale.
Let us learne to stand, and combat her with a resolute mind. And being to take the
greatest advantage she has upon us from her, let us take a cleane contrary way from the
common, let us remove her strangenesse from her, let us conve rse, frequent, and acquaint
ourselves with her, let us have nothing so much in mind as death, let us at all times and
seasons, and in the ugliest manner that may be, indeed with all faces shapen and represent the
same unto our imagination. At the stumbling of a horse, at the fall of a stone, at the least
prick with a pinne, let us presently ruminate and say with ourselves, what if it were death
itself? and thereupon let us take heart of grace, and call our wits together to confront her.
Amiddest our bankets, feasts, and pleasures, let us ever have this restraint or object before
us, that is, the remembrance of our condition and let not pleasure so much mislead or
transport us, that we altogether neglect or forget, how many ways, our joyes, or our
feastings, be subject unto death, and by how many hold-fasts she threatens.us and them.
So did the ægyptians, who in the middest of their banquetings, and in the full of their
greatest cheere, caused the anatomie of a dead man to be brought before them, as a
memorandum and warning to their guests.
Omnem crede diem ubi diluxisse supremum,
Grata superveniet, quo non sperabitur hora. -- HOR. 1. i. Epist. iv. 13.
Thinke every day shines on you as your last
Welcome it will come, whereof hope was past.
It is uncertaine where death looks for us; let us expect her everie where: the premeditation
of death, is a fore-thinking of liberty. - He who has learned to die, has unlearned to
serve. There is no evil in life, for him that has well conceived, how the privation of life

is no evil. To know how to die, does free us from all subjection and constraint. Pualus
Emilius answered one, whom that miserable king of Macedon his prisoner sent to entreat
him he would not lead him in triumph, ’Let him make that request unto himself.’ Verily,
if Nature afford not some help e in all things, it is very hard that art and industrie should
go far before. Of my self, I am not much given to melancholy, but rather to dreaming
and sluggishness. There is nothing wherewith I have ever more entertained my self, than
with the imaginations of death, indeed in the most licentious times of my age,
Iucundum, cum ætas florida ver aqeret. -- CATUL. Eleg. iv. 16
When my age flourishing
Did spend its pleasant spring.
Being amongst fair Ladies, and in earnest play, some have thought me busied, or musing
with my self, how to digest some jealousie, or meditating on the uncertaintie of some
conceived hope, when God he knowes, I was entertaining my self with the remembrance
of some one or other, that but few days before was taken with a burning fever, and of his
sodaine end, coming from such a feast or meeting where I was my self, and with his head
full of idle conceits, of love, and merry glee; supposing the same, either sickness or end,
to be as neare me as him.
Iam fuerit nec post, unquam revocare licebit. -- LUCR. 1. iii. 947.
Now time would be, no more
You can this time restore.
I did no more trouble my self or frowne at such conceit, than at any other. It is
impossible we should not apprehend or feel some motions or startings at such
imaginations at the first, and cmomming sodainely upon us: but doubtlesse, he that shall
manage and meditate upon them with an impartiall eye, they will assuredly, in tract of
time, become familiar to him: Otherwise, for my part, I should he in continuall fear and
agonie; for no man did ever more distrust his life, nor make less account of his
continuance: Neither can health, which hitherto I have so long enjoied, and which so
seldom has been crazed, lengthen my hopes, nor any sicknesse shorten them of it. At
every minute me thinkes I make an escape. And I uncessantly record unto my self, that
whatsoever may be done another day, may be effected this day. Truly hazards and danger
do little or nothing approach us at our end: And if we consider, how many more there
remaine, besides this accident, which in number more than millions seem to threaten us,
and hang over us; we shall find, that be we sound or sicke, lustie or weake, at sea or at
land, abroad or at home, fighting or at rest, in the middest of a battle or in our beds, she is
ever likewise n eere unto us. Nemo altero fragilior est, nemo in crastinum sui certior: ’No
man is weaker then other; none surer of himself (to live) till to morrow.Whatsoever I

have to do before death, all leisure to end the same seems short unto me, indeed were it
but of one hour. Some body not long since turning over my writing tables’, found by
chance a memoriall of something I would have done after my death: I told him (and
indeed it was true), that being but a mile from my house, and in perfect health and lustie, I
had made haste to write it, because I could not assure my self I should ever come home in
safety: As one that am ever hatching of my own thoughts, and place them in my self: I
am ever prepared about that which I may be: nor can death come when she please) put me
in mind of any new thing. A man should ever, as much as in him lieth, be ready booted to
take his journey, and above all things , looke he have then nothing to do but with
himself.
Quid brevi fortes jaculamur ævo
Multa? -- HOR. 1. ii. Od. xiv.
To aime why are we ever bold,
At many things in so short hold?
For then we shall have work sufficient, without any more accrease. Some man
complaineth more that death does hinder him from the assured course of an hoped for
victory, than of death itself; another cries out, he should give place to her, before he
have married his daughter, or directe d the course of his childrens bringing up; another
bewaileth he must forgo his wives company; another moaneth the loss of his children, the
chiefest commodities of his being. I am now by means of the mercy of God in such a
taking, that without regret or grieving at any worldly matter, I am prepared to dislodge,
whensoever he shall please to call me: I am every where free: my farewell is soone taken
of all my friend, except of my self. No man did ever prepare himself to quit the world
more simply and fully, or more generally spake of all thoughts of it, than I am fully
assured I shall do. The deadest deaths are the best.
-- miser, o miser (aiunt) omnia ademit.
Una dies infesta mihi, tot præmia vitæ. -- LUCR. 1. iii. 942.
O wretch, O wretch (friends cry), one day,
All joyes of life has tane away:
And the builder,
maneant (says he) opera interrupta, minæqe Murorum ingentes. -- VIRG.
Aen. 1. iv. 88.
The workes unfinisht lie,
And walls that threatned hie.

A man should designe nothing so long afore hand, or at least with such an intent, as to
passionate himself to see the end of it; we are all borne to be doing.
Cum moriar, medium solvar et inter opus. -- OVID. Am. 1. ii. El. x. 36.
When dying I my self shall spend,
Ere halfe my business come to end.
I would have a man to be doing, and to prolong his lives offices as much as lieth in him,
and let death seize upon me while I am setting my cabiges, care-less of her dart, but
more of my unperfect garden. I saw one die, who being at his last gasp, uncessantly
complained against his destinie, and that death should so unkindly cut him off in the
middest of an historie which he had in hand, and was now come to the fifteenth or
sixteenth of our Kings.
Illud in his rebus non addunt, nec tibi earum,
Iam desiderium rerum super insidet una. -- 2 Lucr. 1. iii. 944.
Friends adde not that in this case, now no more
Shalt you desire, or want things wisht before.
A man should rid himself of these vulgar and hurtful humors. Even as Churchyards
were first placed adjoyning unto churches, and in the most frequented places of the City,
to enure (as Lycurgus said) the common people, women and children, not to be skared at
the sight of a dead man, and to the end that continuall spectacle of bones, sculs, tombs,
graves and burials should forewarn us of our condition, and fatall end.
Quin etiam exhilarare viris convivia cæde
Mos olim, et misercere epulis spectacula dira
Certantum ferro, sæpe et super ipsa cadentum
Pocula, respersis non parco sanguine mensis. -- SYL. Ital. 1. xi. 51.
Nay more, the manner was to welcome guests,
And with dire shewes of slaughter to mix feasts.
Of them that fought at sharpe, and with bords tainted
Of them with much blood, who o’er full cups fainted.
And even as the ægyptians after their feastings and carousings caused a great image of
death to be brought in and showed to the guests and by-standers, by one that cried aloud,
’Drinke and be merry, for such shall you be when you are dead:’ So have I learned this
custom or lesson, to have alwaies death, not only in my imagination, but continually in
my mouth. And there is nothing I desire more to be informed of than of the death of men;

that is to say what words, what countenance, and what face they show at their death; and
in reading of histories, which I so attentively observe. It appeareth by the shuffling and
hudling up of my examples, I affect no subject so particularly as this. Were I a composer
of books, I would keep a register, commented of the diverse deaths, which in teaching
men to die, should after teach them to live. Dicearcus made one of that title, but of another
and less profitable end. Some man will say to me, the effect exceeds the thought so
far, that there is no fence so sure, or cunning so certain, but a man shall either lose or
forget if he come once to that point; let them say what they list: to premeditate on it,
gives no doubt a great advantage: and it is nothing, at the least, to go so far re without
dismay or alteration, or without an ague? There belongs more to it: Nature herself lends
her hand, and gives us courage. If it be a short and violent death, we have no leisure to
fear it; if otherwise, I perceive that according as I engage my self in Sicknesse, I do
naturally fall into some disdaine and contempt of life. I find that I have more adoe to
digest this resolution, that I shall die when I am in health, than I have when I am troubled
with a fever: forasmuch as I have no more such fast hold on the commodities of life,
whereof I begin to lose the use and pleasure, and view death in the face with a less
undanted looke, which makes me hope, that the further I go from that, and the nearer I
approch to this, so much more easily do I enter in composition for their exchange. Even
as I have tried in many other occurrences, which Cæsar affirmed, that often some things
seem greater, being far from us, than if they be near at hand: I have found that being
in perfect health, I have much more been frighted with sicknesse, than when I have felt it.
The jollitie wherein I live, the pleasure and the strength make the other seem so
disproportionable from that, that by imagination I amplifie these commodities by one
moitie, and apprehended them much more heavy and burthensome, than I feel them
when I have them upon my shoulders. The same I hope will happen to me of death.
Consider we by the ordinary mutations and daily declinations which we suffer, how
Nature deprives us of the sight of our loss and impairing: what has an aged man left him
of his youths vigor; and of his forepast life?
Heu senibus vitæ portio quanta manet -- COR. Gal. 1. i. 16.
Alas to men in years how small
A part of life is left in all?
Cæsar to a tired and crazed Souldier of his guard, who in the open street came to him, to
beg leave he might cause himself to be put to death; viewing his decrepit behaviour,
answered plesantly: ’Doest you think to be alive then?’ Were man all at once to fall into
it, I do not think we should be able to bear such a change, but being fair and gently
led on by her hand, in a slow, and as it were unperceived desease; by little and little, and
step by step, she roules us into that miserable state, and day by day seekes to acquaint us
with it. So that when youth failes in us, we feel, nay we perceive no shaking or
transcharge at all in ourselves: which in essence and veritie is a harder death, than that of
a languishing and irkesome life, or that of age. Forasmuch as the leape from an ill being

unto a not being, is not so dangerous or steepie; as it is from a delightfull and flourishing
being unto a painfull and sorrowfull condition. A-weake bending, and faint stopping body
has less strength to bear and under go a heavy burden: So has our soul. She must
be rouzed and raised against the violence and force of this adversarie. For as it is
impossible she should take any rest while she feareth: whereof if she be assured (which
is a thing exceeding humane condition) she may boast that it is impossible unquietnesse,
torment, and fear, much less the least displeasure should lodge in her.
Non vultus instantis tyranni
Mente qualit solida, neque Auster,
Dux inquieti turbidus Adriæ.
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus. -- HOR. iii. Od. iii.
No urging tyrants threatning face,
Where mind is found can it displace,
No troublous wind the rough seas Master,
Nor Joves great hand the thunder-caster.
She is made Mistris of her passions and concupiscence, Lady of indulgence, of shame of
povertie, and of all fortunes injuries. Let him that can, attaine to this advantage. Herein
consists the true and sovereign liberty, that affords us means wherewith to jeast and
make a scorne of force and injust ice, and to deride imprisonment, gives, or fetters.
-- in manicis, et
Compedibus, sævo te sub custode tenebo.
Ipse Deus simul atque volam, me solvet opinor,
Hoc sentit, moriar. Mors ultima linea rerum est. -- HOR. 1. i. Ep. xvi. 76.
In gyves and fetters I will hamper you,
Under a Jayler that shall cruel be:
Yet, when I will, God me deliver shall,
He thinkes, I shall die: death is end of all.
Our religion has had no surer humane foundation than the contempt of life. Discourse of
reason does not only call and summon us unto it. For why should we fear to lose a thing,
which being lost, cannot be moaned? but also, since we are threatened by so many kinds
of death, there is no more inconvenience to fear them all, than to endure one: what matter
is it when it commeth, since it is unavoidable? Socrates answered one that told him, ’The
thirty tyrants have condemned you to death.’ ’And Nature them,’ said he. What fondnesse
is it to carke and care so much, at that instant and passage from all exemption of pain and
care? As our birth brought us the birth of all things, so shall our death the end of all things.
Therefore is it as great folly to weepe, we shall not live a hundred yeeres hence, as to

waile we lived not a hundred yeeres agoe. ’Death is the beginning of an other life.’ So
wept we, and so much did it cost us to enter into this life; and so did we spoil us of our
ancient veil in entring into it. Nothing can be grievous that is but once. Is it reason so
long to fear a thing of so short time? Long life or short life is made all one by death. For
long or short is not ill things that are no more. Aristotle says, there are certain little
beasts alongst the river Hyspanis, that live but one day; she whieh dies at 8 o’clocke in the
morning, dies in her youth, and she that dies at 5 in the afternoon, dies in her decrepitude,
who of us does not laugh, when we shall see ihis short moment of continuance to be had in
consideration of good or ill fortune? The most and the least is ours, if we compare it with
eternitie, or equall it to the lasting of mountains, rivers, stars, and trees, or any other living
creature, is not less ridiculous. But nature compels us to it. Depart (says she) out of this
world, even as you came into it. The same way you came from death to life, return
without passion or amazement, from life to death: your death is but a peece of the worlds
order, and but a parcell of the worlds life.
-- inter se mortales mutua vivunt,
Et quasi cursores vitæ lampada tradunt. -- LUCRET, ii. 74, 77.
1 Mortall men live by mutual entercourse:
And yield their life-torch, as men in a course.
Shal I not change the goodly contexture of things, for you? It is the condition of your
creation: death is a part of ourselves: you flie from yourselves. The being you enjoy is
equally shared betweene life and death. The first day of your birth does as well addresse
you to die, as to live.
Prima quæ vitam dedit, hora, carpsit. -- SEN. Her. Sur. chor. iii.
The first hour, that to me
Gave life, strait, cropt it then.
Nascentes morimur, fluisque ab origine pendet. -MANIL. Ast. 1. iv.
2 As we are borne we die; the end
Does of the originall depend.
All the time you live, you steale it from death: it is at her charge. The continuall work of
your life, is to contrive death: you are in death, during the time you continue in life: for,
you are after death, when you are no longer living. Or if you had rather have it so, you are
dead after life: but during life, you are still dying: and death does more rudely touch the
dying than the dead, and more lively and essentially. If you have profited by life, you have
also been fed thereby, depart then satisfied.

Cur non ut plenus vitæ conviva recedis -- LUCRET. 1. iii. 982.
Why like a full-fed guest,
Depart you not to rest?
If you have not known how to make use of it: if it were unprofitable to you, what need
you care to have, lost it? to what end would you enjoy it longer?
-- cur amplius addere quæris
Rursum quod percat male, et ingratum occidat omne? -- LUCRET. 1. iii.
985.
Why seek you more to gain, what must again,
All perish ill, and pass with grief or pain?
Life in itself is neither good nor evil; it is the place of good or evil, according as you
prepare it for them. And if you have lived one day, you have seen all: one day is equal to
all other days. There is no other light, there is no other night. This Sunne, this Moone,
these Starres, and this disposition, is the very same which your forefathers enjoved. and
which shall also entertaine your posterity.
Non alium videre patres, aliumve nepotes
Aspicient. -- MANIL. i. 522.
No other saw our Sires of old,
No other shall their sons behold.
And if the worst happen, the distribution and varietie of all the acts of my comedie, is
performed in one yeare. If you have observed the course of my foure seasons; they
containe the infancie the youth, the viriltie, and the old age of the world. He has plaied
his part: he knowes no other witness belonging to it, but to begin again, it will ever be
the same, and no other.
-- Versamur ibidem, atque insumus usque, -- LUCRET. 1. iii. 123.
We still in one place turn about,
Still there we are, now in, now out.
Atque in se sua per vestigia volvitur annus. -- VIRG. Georg. 1. ii. 402.
The yeare into itself is cast
By those same steps, that it has past.
I am not purposed to devise you other new sports.

Nam tibi præterea quod machiner, inveniamque
Quod placeat, nihil est; eadem sunt omnia semper. -- Id. 1. ii. 978.
Else nothing, that I can devise or frame,
Can please you, for all things are still the same.
Make roome for others, as others have done for you. Equalitie is the chief ground-work
of equitie, who can comp laine to be comprehended where all are contained? So may you
live long enough, you shall never diminish anything from the time you have to die: it is
bootlesse: so long shall you continue in that state which you fear, as if you had died
being in your swathing-clothes, and when you were sucking.
-- licet, quot vis, vivendo vincere secla,
Mors æterna tamen, nihilominus illa manebit. -- LUCRET. 1. iii. 1126.
Though yeeres you live, as many as you will,
Death is eternall, death remaineth still.
And I will so please you, that you shall have no discontent.
In vera nescis nullum fore morte alium te,
Qui possit vivus tibi te lugere peremptum,
Stansque jacentem. -- 911.
Thou know’st not there shall be not other you,
When you are dead indeed, that can tell how
Alive to waile you dying,
Standing to waile you lying.
Nor shall you wish for life, which you so much desire.
Nec sibi enim quisquam tum se vitamque requirit, -- 963.
Nec desiderium nostri nos afficit ullum. -- 966.
For then none for himself himself or life requires:
Nor are we of ourselves affected with desires.
Death is less to be feared than nothing, if there were anything less than nothing.
-- multo mortem minus ad nos esse putandum,

Si minus esse potest quam quod nihil esse videmus. -- 970.
Death is much less to us, we ought esteeme,
If less may be, than what does nothing seem.
Nor alive, nor dead, it does concern you nothing. Alive because you are: Dead, because
you are no more. Moreover, no man dies before his hour. The time you leave behinde
was no more yours than that which was before your birth, and conc erneth you no more.
Respice enim quam nil ad nos anteacta vetustas
Temporis æterni fuent. -- 1016.
For marke, how all antiquitie foregone
Of all time ere we were, to us was none.
Wheresoever your life ended, there is it all. The profit of life consists not in the space, but
rather in the use. Some man has lived long, that has a short life, Follow it whilst you
have time. It consists not in number of yeeres, but in your will, that you have lived long
enough. Did you think you should never come to the place, where you were still going?
There is no way but has an end. And if company may solace you, does not the whole
world walke the same path?
-- Omnia te, vita perfuncta, sequentur. -- 1012.
Life past, all things at last
Shall follow you as you hast past.
Doe not all things move as you do, or keep your course? Is there any thing grows not
old together with yourselfe? A thousand men, a thousand beasts, and a thousand other
creatures die in the very instant that you die.
Nam nox nulla diem, neque noctem aurora sequuta est,
Que non audierit mistus vagitibus ægris
Ploratus, mortis comites et funeris atri. -- ii, 587.
No night ensued day light; no morning followed night,
Which heard not moaning mixt with sick-mens groaning,
With deaths and funerals joined was that moaning.
To what end recoile you from it, if you cannot go backe. You have seen many who have
found good in death, ending thereby many many miseries. But have you seen any that
has received hurt thereby? Therefore it is meere simplicitie to condemne a thing you

never approve, neither by yourselfe nor any other. Why doest you complain of me and
of destinie? Doe we offer you any wrong? is it for you to direct us, or for us to governe
you? Although your age be not come to her period, your life is. A little man is a whole man
as well as a great man. Neither men nor their lives are measured by the Ell. Chiron refused
immortalitie, being informed of the conditions thereof, even by the God of time and of
continuance, Saturne his father. Imagine truly how much an ever-during life would be
less tolerable and more painfull to a man, than is the life which I have given him. Had
you not death you would then uncessantly curse, and cry out against me, that I had
deprived you of it. I have of purpose and unwittingly blended some bitternesse amongst it,
that so seeing the cornmoditie of its use, I might hinder you from over-greedily
embracing, or indiscreetly calling for it. To continne in this moderation, that is, neither to
fly from life nor to run to death (which I require of you) I have tempered both the one and
other betweene sweetnes and sowrenes. I first taught Thales, the chiefest of your Sages
and Wisemen, that to live and die were indifferent, which made him answer one very
wisely, who asked him why he died not: ’Because,’ said he, ’it is indifferent. The
water, the earth, the aire, the fire, and other members of this my universe, are no more the
instruments of your life than of your death. Why fearest you your last day? he is no more
guiltie, and conferreth no more to your deith, than any of the others. It is not the last step
that causeth weariness: it only declares it. All days march towards death, only the last
comes to it.’ Behold here the good precepts of our universall mother Nature. I have
oftentimes bethought my self whence it proceedeth, that in times of war, the visage of
death (whether we see it in us or in others) seems without all comparison much less
dreadful and terrible unto us, than in our houses, or in our beds, otherwise it should be an
army of Physitians and whiners, and she ever being one, there must needs be much more
assurance amongst countrie-people and of base condition, than in others. I verily believe,
these fearefull looks, and astonishing countenances wherewith we encompass it, are
those that more amaze and terrifie us than death: a new form of life; the out cries of
mothers; the wailing of women and children; th e visitation of dismaid and swouning
friends; the assistance of a number of pale-looliing, distracted, and whining servants; a
darke chamber: tapers burning round about; our couch beset round with Physitians and
Preachers; and to conclude, nothing but horror and astonishment on every side of us: are
we not already dead and buried? The very children are afraid of their friends, when they
see them masked; and so are we. The maske must as well be taken from things as from
men, which being removed, we shall find nothing hid under it, but the very same death,
that a seely varlet, or a simple maid-servant, did latterly suffer without amazement or
fear. Happie is that death which takes all leisure from the preparations of such an
equipage.




Return to


CHAPTER XX: OF THE FORCE OF IMAGINATION






CHAPTER XX: OF THE FORCE OF IMAGINATION
ORTIS imaginatio generat casum: ’A strong imagination begetteth
chance,’ say learned clearks. I am one of those that feel a very great
conflict and power of imagination. All men are shockt therewith, and
some overthrowne by it. One impression of it pierceth me, and for want
of strength to resist her, my endeavor to avoid it. I could live with the
only assistance of holy and merry-hearted men. The sight of others
anguishes does sensibly drive me into anguish; and my sense has often usurped the sense
of a third man. If one cough continually, he provokes my lungs and throat. I am more
unwilling to visit the sicke dutie does engage me unto, than those to whom I am little
beholding, and regard least. I apprehend the evil which I studie, and place it in me. I
deem it not strange that she brings both agues and death to such as give her scope to
work her will and applaud her. Simon Thomas was a great Physitian in his days. I
remember upon a time coming by chance to visit a rich old man that dwelt in Tholouse,
and who was troubled with the cough of the lungs, who discoursing with the said Simon
Thomas of the means of his recoverie, he told him, that one of the best was, to give me
occasion to be delighted in his companie, and that fixing his eyes upon the liveliness and
freshness of my face and setting his thoughts upon the jolitie and vigor, wherewith my

youthful age did then flourish, and filling all his senses with my flourishing estate, his
habitude might thereby be amended, and his health recovered. But he forgot to say, that
mine might also be empaired and infected. Gallus Vibius did so well enurehis mind to
comprehend the essence and motions of folly, that he so transported his judgement from
out his seat, as he could never afterwards bring it to his right place again; and might
rightly boast to have become a foole through wisdom. Some there are, that through fear
anticipate the hang-mans hand; as he did, whose friends having obtained his pardon, and
putting away the cloth wherewith he was hoodwinkt, that he might hear it read, was
found stark dead upon the scaffold, wounded only by the stroke of imagination. We
sweat, we shake, we grow pale, and we blush at the motions of our imaginations; and
wallowing in our beds we feel our bodies agitated and turmoiled at their apprehensions,
indeed in such manner as sometimes we are ready to yield up the spirit. And burning youth
(although asleepe) is often therewith so possessed and enfolded, that dreaming it does
satisfy and enjoy her amorous desires.
Ut quasi transactis sæpe omnibu’ rebu’ profundant
Fluminis ingentes fluctus, vestemnque cruentent. -- LUCRET. 1. iv. 1027.
And if all things were done, they powre foorth streames,
And bloody their night-garment in their dreames.
And although it be not strange to see some men have hornes growing upon their head in
one night, that had none when they went to bed: notwithstanding the fortune or success of
Cyppus King of Italie is memorable, who because the day before he had with earnest
affection assisted and been attentive at a bul-baiting, and having all night long dreamed
of hornes in his head, by the very force of imagination brought them forth the next
morning in his forehead. An earnest passion gave the son of Croesus his voice, which
Nature denied him. And Antiochus got an ague, by the excellent beautie of Stratonice so
deeply imprinted in his mind. Plinie reporteth to have seen Lucius Cossitius upon his
marriage day to have been transformed from a woman to a man. Pontanus and others
recount the like metamorphosies to have hapned in Italie these ages past: And through a
vehement desire of him and his mother.
Vota puer solvit, que femina voverat Iphis. -- OVID . Met. 1. ix. 794.
Iphis a boy, the vows then paid,
Which he vow’d when he was a maid.
My self traveling on a time by Vitry in France, hapned to see a man, whom the Bishop of
Soissons has in confirmation, named Germane, and all the inhabitants thereabout have
both known and seen to be a woman-child, until she was two and twentie years of
age, called by the name of Marie. He was, when I saw him, of good years, and had a long

beard, and was yet unmarried. He says, that upon a time, leaping, and straining himself
to overleape another, he wot not how, but where before he was a woman, he suddenly felt
the instrument of a man to come out of him: and to this day the maidens of that town and
countrie have a song in use, by which they warne one another, when they are leaping, not
to strain themselves overmuch, or open thir legs too wide, for fear they should be
turned to boies, as Marie Germane was. It is no great wonder, that such accidents do
often happen, for if imagination have power in such things, it is so continually annexed,
and so forcibly fastened to this subject, that lest she should so often fall into the relaps of
the same thought, and sharpnesse of desire, it is better one time for all to incorporate this
virile part unto wenches. Some will not sticke to ascribe the scarres of King Dagobert, or
the cicatrices of Saint Francis unto the power of Imagination. Othersome will say, that by
the force of it, bodies are sometimes removed from their places. And Celsus reports of a
Priest, whose soul was ravished into such an extasie, that for a long time the body
remained void of all respiration and sense. Saint Augustine speaks of another, who if
he but heard any lamentable and wailful cries, would suddenly fall into a swone, and
be so forcibly carried from himself, that did any chide and braule never so loud, pinch
and thumpe him never so much, be could not be made to stir, until he came to himself
again. Then would he say, he had heard sundry strange voyces, coming as it were from
a far, and perceiving his pinches and bruses, wondered at them. And that it was not an
obstinate conceit, or wilfull humor in him, or against his f eeling sense, it plainly
appeared by this, because during his extasie, he seemed to have neither pulse nor breath. It
is very likely that the principal credit of visions, of enchantments, and such extraordinary
effects, proceedeth from the power of imaginations, working especially in the mindes of
the vulgar sort, as the weakest and seeliest, whose conceit and beleefe is so seized upon,
that they imagine to see what they see not. I am yet in doubt, these pleasant bonds,
wherewith our world is so fettered, and France so pestered, that nothing else is spoken of,
are perhaps but the impressions of apprehension, and effects of fear. For I know by
experience, that some one, for whom I may as well answer as for my self, and in whom
no manner of suspition either of weaknesse or enchantment might fall, hearing a
companion of his make report of an extraordinary faint sowning, wherein he was fallen, at
such a time as he least looked for it and wrought him no small shame, whereupon the
horrour of his report did so strongly strike his imagination, as he ranne the same fortune,
and fell into a like drooping. And was thenceforward subject to fall into like fits: So did
the passionate remembrance of his inconvenience possesse and tyrannize him; but his
fond doting was in time remedied by another kind of raving. For himself avowing and
publishing aforehand the infirmitie he was subject unto, the contention of his soul was
solaced upon this, that bearing his evil as expected, his dutie thereby diminished, and he
grieved less thereat. And when at his choice, he has had law and power (his thought
being cleered and unmasked, his body finding itself in his right due place) to make the
same to be felt, seized upon, and apprehended by others knowledge: he has fully and
perfectly recovered himself. If a man have once been capable, he cannot afterward be
incapable, except by a just and absolute weaknesse. Such a mischief is not to be feared,
but in the enterprises where our mind is beyond all measure bent with desire and respect;

and chiefly where opportunity comes unexpected, and requires a sudden dispatch. There
is no means for a man to recover himself from his trouble; I know some, who have
found to come unto it with their bodies as it were halfe glutted elsewhere, thereby to
stupifie or allay the heat of that fury, and who through age, find themselves less unable,
by how much more they be less able: And another, w ho has also found good, in that a
friend of his assured him to be provided with a counter-battery of forcible enchantments,
to preserve him in any such conflict: It is not amisse I relate how it was. An Earle of very
good place, with whom I was familiarly acquainted, being married to a very fair Lady,
who had long been solicited for love by one assisting at the wedding, did greatly trouble
his friends; but most of all an old Lady his kins-woman, who was chief at the marriage,
and in whose hous e it was solemnized, as she that much feared such sorceries and
witchcrafts: which she gave me to understand, I comforted her as well as I could, and
desired her to rely upon me. I had by chance a peece of golden plate in my trunke,
wherein were ingraven certain celestiall figures good against the Sunne-beames, and for
the head-ach, being fitly laid upon the suture of the head: and that it might the better he
kept there, it was sewed to a riband, to be fasteded under the chin. A fond doting c onceit,
and cosin-germane to that we now speak of. James Peletier had while he lived in my
house bestowed that singular gift upon me; I advised my self to put it to some use, and
told the Earle, he might perhaps be in danger, and come to some misfortune as others had
done, the rather because some were present, that would not sticke to procure him some ill
lucke, and which was worse, some spitefull shame; but nevertheless I willed him boldly
to go to be d: For I would show him the part of a true friend, and in his need, spare not for
his good to employ a miracle, which was in my power; alwaies provided, that on his
honor he would promise me faithfully to keep it very secret; which was only, that when
about mid-night he should have his candle brought hime if he had had no good success in
his business, he should make such and such a signe to me. It fel out his mind was so
quailed, and his ears so dulled, that by reason of the bond wherewith the trouble of his
imagination had tied him, he could not run on poste: and at the hour appointed, made
the signe agreed upon betweene us, I came and whispered him in the eare, that under
pretence to put us all out of his chaluber, he should rise out of his bed, and in jesting
manner take my night-gowne which I had on, and put it upon himself (which he might
well do, because we were much of one stature) and keep it on till he had performed my
Appointment, which was, that when we should he gone o ut of the chamber, he should
withdraw himself to make water, and using certain jestures I had showed him, speak
such words thrice over. And every time he spake them he should girt the ribband, which I
put into his hands, and very carefully place the plate thereto fastened, just upon his
kidneyes, and the whole figure, in such a posture. All which when he had accordingly
done, and the last time so fastened the ribband, that it might neither be untide nor stirred
from his place, he should then bo ldly and confidently return to his charge, and not forget
to spread my night-gowne upon his bed, but so as it might cover them both. These
fopperies are the chief of the effect. Our thought being unable so to free itself, but some
strange means will proceed from some abstruse learning: There inanitie gives them
weight and credit. To conclude, it is most certain, my Characters proved more venerian

than solare, more in action than in prohibition. It was a ready and curious humor drew
me to this effect, far from my nature. I am an enemy to craftie and feigned actions, and
hate all suttletie in my hands, not only recreative, but also profitable. If the action be not
vicious, the course to it is faultie. Amasis King of Egypt took to wife Laodice, a very
beauteous young virgin of Greece, and he that before had in every other place found and
showed himself a lustie gallant, found himself so short, when he came to grapple with
her , that he threatned to kill her, supposing it had been some charme or sorcerie. As in
all things that consist in the fantasia, she addrest him to devotion. And having made his
vows and promises to Venus, he found himself divinely freed, even from the first night,
of his oblations and sacrifices. Now they wrong us to receive and admit us with their
wanton, squeamish, quarrelous countenances, which setting us afire, extinguish us.
Pythagoras his neece was wont to say, that a woman which lies with a man ought, together
with her petiecoate, leave off all bashfulness, and with her petiecoate, take the same
again. The mind of the assailant molested with sundry different alarums, is easily
dismaid. And he whom imagination has once made to suffer this shame (and she has
caused the same to be felt but in the first acquaintances; because they are then burning and
violent, and in the first acquaintance and coming together, or trial a man gives of
himself, he is much more afraid and qu aint to misse the marke he shoots at) having
begun ill he fals into an ague or spite of this accident, which afterward continueth in
succeeding occasions. Married men because time is at their command, and they may go to
it when they list, ought never to press or importune their enterprise, unless they be
readie. And it is better undecently to faile in hanseling the nuptiall bed, full of agitation
and fits, by waiting for some or other fitter occasion, and more private opportunity, less
sudden an d alarmed, than to fall into a perpetual misery, by apprehending an
astonishment and desperation of the first refusall. Before possession taken, a patient ought
by sallies, and diverse times, lightly assay and offer himself without vexing or opiniating
himself, definitively to convince himself. Such as know their members docile and
tractable by nature, let them only endeavor to countercosin their fantasia. Men have
reason to checke the indocile libe rtie of this member, for so importunately insinuating
himself when we have no need of him, and so importunately, or as I may say
impertinently failing, at what time we have most need of him; and so imperiously
contesting by his authority with our will, refusing with such fiercenes and obstinacy our
solicitations both mentall and manuall. Nevertheless if a man inasmuch as he does
gormandize and devour his rebellion, and draws a trial by his condemnation, would pay
me for to plead his cause, I w ould perhaps make other of our members to be
suspected to have (in envy of his importance, and sweetness of his use) devised this
imposture, and framed this set quarrell against him. and by some malicious complot armed
the world against him, enviously charging him alone with a fault common to them all. For
I refer to your thought, whether there be any one particular part of our body that does
not sometimes refuse her particular operation to our will and wish, and that does not often
exercise and practise against our will. All of them have their proper passions, which
without any leave of ours do either awaken or lull them asleepe. How often do the
forced motions and changes of our faces witness the secretest and most lurking thoughts

we have, and bewray them to by-standers? The same cause that does animate this member,
does also, unwitting to us, embolden our heart, our lungs, and our pulses. The sight of a
pleasing object, reflecting imperceptibly on us, the flame of a contagiou s or aguish
emotion. Is there nought besides these muscles and veines, that rise and fall without the
consent, not only of our will, but also of our thought? We cannot command our hair to
stand on end, nor our skinne to startle for desire or fear. Our hands are often carried
where we direct them not. Our tongue and voice are sometimes to seek of their faculties,
the one loses her speech, the other her nimblenesse. Even when we have nothin g to feed
upon, we would willingly forbid it: the appetites to eat, or list to drinke, do not leave to
move the parts subject to them, even as this other appetite, and so, though it be out of
season, forsaketh us, when he thinks good. Those instruments that serve to discharge the
belly, have their proper compressions and dilatations, besides our intent, and against our
meaning, as those are destined to discharge the kidneys. And that which, the better to
authorize our wills power, Saint Augustin alleageth, to have seen one, who could at all
times command his posterior, to let as many scapes as he would, and which Vives
endeareth by the example of an other in his days, who could let tunable and organized
ones, following the tune of any voice propounded into his ears, inferreth the pure
obedience of that member: than which none is commonly more indiscreet anid
tumultuous. Seeing my self know one so skittish and mutinous, that these fortie years
keepes his master in such awe, that, will he or nill be, he will with a continuall breath,
constant and unintermitted custom breake winde at his pleasure, and so brings him to his
grave. And would to God I knew it but by histories how that many times our belly being
restrained thereof, bring us even to the gates of a pining and languishijig heath: And that
the Emperor, who gave us free leave to vent at all times, and every where, had also given
us the power to do it. But our will, by whose privilege we advance this reproch, how
much more likely, and consonant to trueth may we tax it of rebellion, and accuse it of
sedition, by reason of its unruliness and disobedience. Will she at all times do that
which we would have her willingly to do? Is she not often willing to effect that which
we forbid her to desire? and that to our manifest prejudice and dammage? Does she suffer
herself to be directed by the conclusions of our reason? To conclude, I would urge in
defense of my client, that it would please the judges to consider , that concerning this
matter, his cause being inseparably conjoyned to a comfort, and indistinctly; yet will not a
man addresse himself but to him, both by the arguments and charges, which call no way
appertaine to his said consort. For, his effect is indeed sometime importunately to invite,
but to refuse never: and also to invite silently and quietly. Therefore is the sawcinesse and
illegalitie of the accusers seen. Howsoever it be, protesting that advocates and judges
may wrangle, contend, and give sentence, what and how they please, Nature will in the
meane time follow her course; who, had she endowed this member with any particular
privilege, yet had she done but right, and showed but reason. Author of the only immortall
work of mortal man. Divine work according to Socrates; and love, desire of
immortalitie, and immortall Damon himself. Some man perhaps, by the effects of
imagination leaveth the pox or kings evil here, which hi s companion carrieth into
Spain again: lo here why in such cases men are accustomed to require a prepared

mind, why do physicians labor and practise before hand the conceit and credence
of their patients, with so many false promises of their recovery and health, unless it be
that the effect of imagination may supple and prepare the imposture of one of their
decoction? They knew that one of their trades-masters has left written, how some men
have been found, in whom the only sight of a potion has wrought his due operation: all
which humor or caprice is now come into my mind, upon the report which an
apothecarie, whilome a servant in my fathers house, was wont to tell me, a man by
knowledge simple, and by birth a Switzer; a nation little vain-glorious, and not much
given to lying, which was, that for a long time he had known a merchant in Tholouse,
sickish, and much troubled with the stone, and who often had need of glisters, who
according to the fits and occurrences of his evil, caused them diversly to be prescribed by
physicians. Which being brought him, no accustomed form to them belonging was
omitted, and would often taste whether they were too hot, and view them well. and lying
along upon his bed, on his bellie, and all complements performed, only injection excepted,
which ceremony ended, the apothecarie gone, and the patient lying in his bed, even as if
he had received a glister indeed, he found and felt the very same effect which they do
that have effectually taken them. And if the physician saw it had not wrought sufficiently,
he would accordingly give him two or three more in the same manner. My witness
protesteth, that the sicke mans wife, to save charges (for he paid for them as if he had
received them) having sometimes assaid to make them only with luke warme water, the
effect discovered the craft, and being found not to work at all, they were forced to return
to the former, and use the apothecarie. A woman supposing to have swallowed a pinne
with her bread, cried and vexed her-self, even as if she had felt an intolerable pain in her
throat, where she imagined the same to sticke; but because there appeared neither swelling
or alteration, a skilfull man deeming it to be but a fantasie conceived, or opinion,
apprehended by eating of some gretty peece of bread, which perhaps might pricke her in the
swallow, made her to vomit, and unknonne to her, cast a pin in that which she had vomi
ted. Which the woman perceiving and imagining she had cast the same, was presently
eased of her pain. I have known a gentleman, who having feasted a company of very
honest gentlemen and gentlewomen, in his own house, by way of sport, and in jest,
boasted two or three days after (for there was no such thing) that he had made them eat of
a baked cat; where the gentlewoman of the companie apprehended such horror, that
falling into a violent ague and distemper of her stomacke, she could by no meane s he
recovered. Even brute beasts, as well as we, are seen to be subject to the power of
imagination; witness some dogs, who for sorrow of their masters death are seen to die,
and whom we ordinarily see to startle and harke in their sleep, and horses to neigh and
struggle. But all this may be referred to the narrow future of the spirit and the body,
entercommunicating their fortunes one unto another. It is another thing that imagination
does sometime s work, not only against her own body, but also against that of others.
And even as one body ejecteth a disease to his neighhour, as does evidently appeare by the
plague, pox, or sore eyes, that go from one to another:
Dum spectant oculi læsos, læduntur et ipsi:

Multaque corporibus transitione nocent.-- OVID. Am. 1. ii. 219.
Eies become sore, while they looke on sore eyes:
By passage many ills our limbs surprise.
Likewise the imagination moved and tossed by some vehemence, does cast some darts,
that may offend a strange object. Antiquitie has held, that certain women of Scithia,
being provoked and vexed against some men, had the power to kill them only with their
looke. The tortoises and the estriges hatch their egges with their looks only, a signe that
they have some ejaculative virtue. And concerning witches they are said to have offensive
and harme-working eyes.
Nescia quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos. -- VIRG. Buc. Ecl. iii. 103.
My tender Lambs I cannot see,
By what bad eye, bewitched be.
Magitians are but ill respondents for me. So it is, that by experience we see women to
transferre diverse markes of their fantasies, unto children they bear in their wombes:
witnes she that brought forth a blacke-a-more. There was also presented unto Charles,
King of Bohemia, an Emperor, a young girle, borne about Pisa, all shagd and hairy over
and over, which her mother said, to have been conceived so, by reason of an image of
Saint John Baptist, that was so painted, and hung over her bed. That the like is in beasts, is
witnessed by Jacob’s sheep, and also by partridges and hares, that grow white by the snow
upon mountaines. There was lately seen a cat about my own house, so earnestly eyeing
a bird, sitting upon a tree, that heseeing the cat, they both so wistly fixed th eir looks one
upon another, so long, that at last the bird fell down as dead in the cat’s pawes, either
drunken by his own strong imagination, or drawne by some attractive power of the cat.
Those that love hawking, have perhaps heard the Falkner tale, who earnestly fixing his sight
upon a kite in the aire, laid a wager that with the only force of his looke, he would make it
come stooping down to the ground, and as some report did it many times. The histories I
borrow, I refer to the consciences of those I take them from. The discourses are mine,
and hold together by the proofe of reason, not of experiences: each man may adde his
example to them: and who has none, considering the number and varietie of accidentes
let him not leave to think, there are store of them. If I come not well for my self, let
another come for me. So in the studie wherein I treat of our manners and motions, the
fabulous testimonies, alwaies provided they be likely and possible, may serve to the
purpose, as well as the true, whether it hapned or no, be it at Rome or at Paris, to John or
Peter, it is alwaies a tricke of humane capacitie, of which I am profitably advised by this
report. I see it and reape profit by it, as well in shadow as in body. And in diverse lessons
that often histories afford, I commonly make use of that which is most rare and
memorable. Some writers there are whose end is but to relate the events. Mine, if I could

attaine to it, should be to declare what may come to pass, tou ching the same. It is justly
allowed in schooles, to suppose similitudes, when they have none. Yet do not I so, and
concerning that point, in superstitious religion, I exceed all historicall credit. To the
examples I here set down, of what I have read, heard done, or seen, I have forbid my
self so much as to dare to change the least, or alter the idlest circumstances. My
conscience does not falsifie the least jot. I wot not whether my insight does. Concerning
this subject I do sometimes ent er into conceit, that it may well become a divine, a
philosopher, or rather men of exquisite conscience, and exact wisdom, to write histories.
How can they otherwise engage their credit on a popular reputation? How can they answer
for the thoughts of unknown persons? And make their bare conjectures pass for current
paiment? Of the actions of diverse members, acted in their presence, they would refuse to
bear witness of them, if by a judge they were put to their corporall oath. And there is no
man so familiarly known to them, of whose inward intention they would undertake to
answer at full. I hold it less hazardous to write of things past than present; forasmuch as
the writer is not bound to give account but of a borrowed trueth. Some persuade me to
write the affairs of my time, imagining I can see them with a sight less blinded with
passion, than other men, and perhaps nearer, by reason of the accesse which fortune has
given me to the chiefest of diverse factions. But they will not say, how for the glory of
Salust, I would not take the paines; as one that am a vowed enemy of observance, to
assiduitie, and to constancy, and that there is nothing so contrary to my style as a
continued narration. I do so often for want of breath breake off and interrupt my self. I
have neither composition nor explication of any worth. I am as ignorant as a child of the
phrases and vowels belonging to common things. And therefore have I atte mpted to say
what I can, accommodating the matter to my power. Should I take any man for a guide,
measure might differ from his. For, my liberty being so far, I might perhaps publish
judgements, agreeing with me, and consonant to reason, yet unlawfull and punishable.
Plutarke would perhaps tell us of that which he had written, that it is the workes of
others, that his examples are in all and everie where true, that they are profitable to
posterity, and presented with a lustre, that lights and directs us unto virtue, and that is his
work. It is not dangerous, as in a medicinable drug, whether an old tale or report, be it
thus or thus, so or so.



Return to


CHAPTER XXI:
THE PROFIT OF ONE MAN IS THE DAMMAGE OF ANOTHER






CHAPTER XXI: THE PROFIT OF ONE MAN IS THE DAMMAGE OF ANOTHER
EMADES the Athenian condemned a man of the City, whose trade
was to sell such necessaries as belonged to burials, under colour, he
asked too much profit for them: and that such profit could not come
unto him without the death of many people. This judgement seems to
be i ll taken, because no man profiteth but by the loss of others: by
which reason a man should condemne all manner of gain. The
Merchant thrives not but by the licentiousnesse of youth; the Hushandman by dearth of
some; the Architect but by the ruine of houses; the Lawyer by suits and controversies
betweene men: Honour itself, and practice of religious ministers, is drawne from our
death and vices. ’No physician delighteth in the health of his own friend,’ says the ancient
Greeke Comike: ’nor no Souldier is pleased with the peace of his citie, and so of the rest.’
And which is worse, let every man sound his own conscience, he shall find that our
inward desires are for the most part nourished and bred in us by the loss and hurt of
others; which when I considered, I began to think how Nature does not gainesay herself
in this, concerning her general policy: for Physitians hold that the birth, increase, and

augmentation of everything, is the alteration and corruption of another.
Nam quodcunque suis mutatum finibus exit,
Continuo hoc mors est illius, quod fuit ante. -- LUCRET. 1. i. 687, 813; 1.
ii. 162; 1. iii. 536.
Whatever from it’s bounds does changed pass,
That strait is death of that which erst it was.



Return to


CHAPTER XXII:
OF CUSTOME, AND HOW A RECEIVED LAW SHOULD NOT EASILY BE
CHANGED






CHAPTER XXII: OF CUSTOME, AND HOW A RECEIVED LAW
SHOULD NOT EASILY BE CHANGED
Y opinion is that he conceived aright of the force of custom that first
invented this tale; how a country woman having enured herself to
cherish and bear a young calfe in her arms, which continuing, she
got such a custom, that when he grew to be a great oxe, she carried
him still in her arms. For truly Custome is a violent and deceiving
schoole-mistris. She by little and little, and as it were by stealth,
establisheth the foot of her authority in us; by which mild and gentle
beginning, if once by the aid of time it have setled and planted the same in us, it will
soone discover a furious and tyrannical countenance unto us; against which we have no
more the liberty to lift so much as our eyes; we may plainly see her upon every occasion
to force the rules of Nature: Vsus efficacissimus rerum omnium magister: (PLIN. Epist.
xx) Use is the most effectuall master of all things. I believe Platoes den mentioned in his
common-wealth, and the Physitians that so often quit their arts reason by authority; and

the same King who by means of her, ranged his stomacke to be nourished with poyson;
and the mayden that Albe rt mentioneth to have accustomed her-self to live upon spiders:
and now in the new-found world of the Indians, there were found diverse populous nations,
in far differing climates, that lived upon them; made provision of then, and carefully fed
them; as also of grass-hoppers, pissemires, lizards, and nightbats; and a toad was sold for
six crownes in a time that all such meats were scarce amongst them, which t hey boyle,
rost, bake, and dresse with diverse kinds of sawces. Others have been found to whom our
usual flesh and other meats were mortal and venomous. Consuetudinis magna est vis;
Pernoctant venatores in nive, in montibus uri se patiuntur: Pugiles clæstibus contusi, ne
ingemiseunt quidem. (CIC. Tusc. Qu. ii.) ’Great is the force of custom: Huntsmen wil
watch all night in snow, and endure to be scorched on the hils: Fencers brused with sand-
bags or cudgels, do not so much as groan.’ These forrein examples are not strange, if
we but consider what we ordinarily find by travell, and how custom quaileth and
weakeneth our customary senses. We need not go seek what our neighbors report of
the Cataracts of Nile; and what Philosophers deem of the celestiall music, which is,
that the bodies of it’s circles, being solid smooth, and in their rowling motion, touching
and rubbing one against another, must of necessitie produce a wonderful harmonie: by
the changes and entercaprings of which, the revolutions, motions, cadences, and carols of
the asters and planets, are caused and transported. But that universally the hearing senses
of these low world’s creatures, dizzied and lulled asleepe, as those of the ægyptians are, by
the continuation of that sound, how loud and great soever it be, cannot sensibly perceive
or distinguish the same. Smiths, Millers, Forgers, Armorers, and such other, could not
possibly endure the noise that commonly rings in their ears, if it did pierce them as it
does us. My perfumed Jerkin serveth for my nose to smell unto, but after I have worne it
three or foure days together, not I, but others have the benefit of it. This is more strange,
that notwithstanding long intermissions, custom may join and establish the effect of her
impression upon our senses; as they prove that dwell near to bells or steeples. I have my
longing near unto a tower, where both evening and morning a very great bell does chime
Ave Marie and Coverfew, which jangling does even marke the tower to shake; at first it
troubled me much, but I was soone acquainted with it, so that now I am nothing offended
with it, and many times it cannot waken me out of my sleeps. Plato did once chide a child
for playing with nuts, who answered him, ’Thou chidest me for a small matter.’ ’Custome,’
replied Plato, ’is no small matter.’ I find that our greatest vices make their first habit in us
from our infancie, and that our chief government and education lieth in our nurses hands.
Some mothers think it good sport to see a child wring off a chickens necke, and strive to
beat a dog or cat. And some fathers are so fond-foolish, that they will conster as a good
Augur or fore-boding of a martiall mind to see their sons misuse a poore peasant, or
tug a lackey, that does not defend himself; and impute it to a ready wit, when by some
wily disloyaltie, or crafty deceit, they see them cousin and over-reach thei r fellowes: yet
are they the true seeds or roots of cruelty, of tyranny, and of treason. In youth they bud,
and afterward grow to strength, and come to perfection by means of custom. And it is a
very dangerous institution, to excuse so base and vile inclinations, with the weaknesse of
age, and lightness of the subject. First, it is nature that speaks, whose voice is then

shriller, purer, and more native, when it is tender, newer, and youngest. Secondly, the
deformity of the crime consisteth not in the difference betweene crownes and pins; it
depends of itself. I find it more just to conclude thus: why should not he as well
deceive one of a crowne as he does of a pinne? than as commonly some do, saying, alas,
it is but a pinne; I warrant you, he will not do so with crownes. A man would carefully
teach children to hate vices of their own genuity, and so distinguish the deformity of
them, that they may not only eschew them in their actions, but above all I hate them in
their hearts: and what colour soever they bear, the very conceit may seem odious unto
them, I know well, that because in my youth I have ever accustomed my self to tread a
plaine-beaten path, and have ever hated to entermeddle any manner of deceipt of
cousoning-craft, even in my childish sports (for truly it is to be noted, that Childrens
playes are not sports, and should be deemed as their most serious actions); there is no
pastime so slight, that inwardlie I have not a natural propension and serious care, indeed
extreme contradiction, not to use any deceipt. I shuffle and handle the cards as earnestly
for counters, and keep as strict an accompt, as if they were double duckets, when playing
with my wife or children, it is indifferent to me whether I win or lose, as I do when I
play in good earnest. How and wherever it be, my own eyes will suffice to keep me
in office; none else do watch me so narrowly; not that I respect more . It is not long
since in my own house, I saw a little man, who at Nantes was borne without arms, and
has so well fashioned his feet to those services his hands should have done him, that in
truth they have almost forgotten their natural office. In all his discourses he nameth them
his hands: he carveth any meat, he chargeth and shoots off a pistole, be threads a needle,
he soweth, he writeth, puts off his cap, combeth his head, plaieth at cards and dice;
shuffleth and handleth them with as great dexteritie as any other man that has perfect use
of his hands: the monie I have sometimes given him he has carried away with his feet, as
well as any other could do with his hands. I saw another, being a Child, that with the
bending of his feet (because he had no hands) would brandish a two-hand-sword and
manage a Hol-bard, as nimbly as any man could do with his hands: he would cast them
in the aire, then receive them again, he would throw a Dagger, and make a whip to yarke
and lash, as cunningly as any Carter in France. But her effects are much better discovered
in the strange impressions which it worketh in our mindes where it meetes not so much
resistance. What cannot she bring to pass in our judgements and in our conceits? Is there
any opinion so fantastical, or conceit so extravagant (I omit to speak of the grosse
imposture of religions, wherewith so many great nations and so many worthy and
sufficient men have been besotted, and drunken: For, being a thing beyond the compasse
of our humane reason, it is more excusable if a man that is not extraordinarily illuminated
thereunto by divine favor, do lose and miscarrie himself therein), or of other opinions,
is there any so strange, that custom has not planted and established by laws in what
regions soever it has thought good? And this ancient exclamation is most just: Non pudet
physiumc, id est speculatorem venatoremque naturæ, ab animis consuetudine imbutis quæ
rere testimonium veritatis?(CIC. Nat. Deor. 1. i.) ’Is it not a shame for a natural
Philosopher, that is the watchman and hunts-man of nature, to seek the testimony of
truth from mindes endowed and double dide with custom?’ I am of opinion, that no fantasie

so mad can fall into humane imagination, that meetes not with the example of some
public custom, and by consequence that our reason does not ground and bring to a stay.
There are certain people that turn their backs towards those they salute, and never looke
him in the face whom they would honor or worship. ’There are others, who when the
King spitteth, the most favoured Lady in his court stretcheth forth her hand; and in
another countrey, where the noblest about him, stoop to the ground to gather his ordure
in some fine linnen cloth. Let us here by the way insert a tale. A French Gentleman was
ever wont to blow his nose in his hand (a thing much against our fashion), maintaining his
so doing; and who in wittie jesting was very famous. He asked m e on a time, what
privilege this filthie excrement had, that we should have a daintie linnen cloth or
handkercher to receive the same; and which is worse, so carefully fold it up, and keep the
same about us, which should be more loathsome to ones stomacke than to see it cast away,
as we do all our other excrements and filth. Mee thought he spake not altogether without
reason: and custom had taken from me the discerning of this strangenesse, which being
reported of another countrie we deem so hideous. Miracles are according to the
ignorance wherein we are by nature, and not according to natures essence; use brings the
sight of our judgement asleepe. The barbarous heathen are nothing more strange to us than
we are to them: nor with more occasion, as every man would avow, if after he had
travelled through these far-fetcht examples, he could stay himself upon the discourses
and soundly conferre them. Humane reason is a tincture in like weight and measure,
infused into all our opinions and customs what form soever they be of: infinite in matter:
infinite in diversitie. But I will return to my theme. There are certain people, where,
except his wife and children, no man speaks to the King but through a trunke. Another
nation, where virgins show their secret parts openly, and married women diligently hide
and cover them. To which custom, this fashion, used in other places, has some relation:
where chastitie is nothing regarded but for marriage sake; and maidens may at their
pleasure lie with whom they list; and being with child, they may without fear of
accusation, spoyle and cast their chitdren with certain medicaments, which they have
only for that purpose. And in another country, if a Merchant chance to marrie, all other
Merchants that are bidden to the wedding are bound to lie with the bride before her
husband, and the more they are in number, the more honor and commendation is hers for
constancy and capacitie; the like if a gentleman or an officer marrie; and so of all orders:
except it be a day-labourer, or some other of base condition for then must the Lord or
Prince lie with the bride amongst whom (notwithstanding this abusive custom) loyaltie in
married women is highly regarded, and held in speciall account during the time they are
married. Others there are where public brothel-houses of men are kept, and where open
mart of marriages are ever to be had: where women go to the wars with their hushands,
and have place, not only in fight, but also in command, where they do not only weare
jewels at their noses, in their lip and cheekes, and in their toes, but also big wedges of gold
through their paps and buttocks, where when they eat they wipe their fingers on their
thighs, on the bladder of their genitories, and the soles of their feet; where not children,
but brethren and nephewes inherit; and in some places, the nephewes only, except in the
succession of the Prince. Where to order the communitie of goods, which amongst them is

religiously observed, certain Soveraigne Magistrats have the general charge of
husbandry and tilling of the lands, and of the distribution of the fruits, according to every
mans need: where they howle and weepe at their childrens deaths, and joy and feast at
their old mens decease. Where ten or twelve men be all in one bed with all their wives;
where such women as lose their hushands , by any violent death, may marrie again,
others not: where the condition of women is so detested that they kill all the maiden
children as soon as they are borne, and to supply their natural need, they buy women of
their neighbors. Where men may at their pleasure, without alleging any cause, put away
their wives, but they (what just reason soever they have) may never put away their
husbands. Where husbands may lawfully sell their wives, if they be barren. Where they
cause dead bodies first to be boiled, and then to be brayed in a morter, so long till it come
to a kind of pap, which afterward they mingle with their wine, and so drinke it. Where the
most desired sepulcher that some wish for, is to be devoured of dogges, and in some
places of birds. Where some think that blessed soules live in all liberty, in certain
pleasant fields stored with al commodities, and that from them proceeds that Eccho which
we hear. Where they fight in the water, and shoot execeeding true with their bowes as
they are swimming. Where in signe of subjection men must raise their shoulders and
stoop with their heads, and put off their shoes when they enter their Kings houses. Where
Eunuchs that have religious women in keeping, because they shall not be loved, have also
their noses and lips cut off. And Priests that that they may the better acquaint themselves
with their Demons, and take their Oracles, put out their eyes. Where every man makes
himself a God of what be pleaseth: the hunter of a Lion or a Fox; the fisher, of a certain
kind of Fish; and frame themselves Idols of every humane action or passion: the Sunne,
the Moone, and the earth are their chiefest Gods: the form of swearing is, to touch the
ground, looking upon the Sunne, and where they eat both flesh and fish raw. Where the
greatest oath is to sweare by the name of some deceased man that has lived in good
reputation in the countrie, touching his grave with the hand. Where the new-years gifts
that Kings send unto Princes their vassals every yeare, is some fire, which when it is
brought, all the old fire is cleane put out: of which new fire all the neighbouring people
are bound upon pain, læse majestatis, to fetch for their uses. When the King (which often
cometh to pass) wholly to give himself unto devotion, gives over his charge, his next
successor is bound to do like, and convayeth the right of the Kingdome unto the third
heir. Where they diversifie the form of policy according as their affairs seem to
require; and where they depose their Kings when they think good, and appoint them
certain ancicnt grave men to undertake and weald the Kingdoms government, which
sometimes is also committed to the communaltie. Where both men and women are equally
circumcised, and likewise baptised. Where the souldier, that in one or diverse combats has
presented his King with seven enemies heads, is made noble. Where some live under that
so rare and unsociable opinion of the mortalitie of soules. Where women are brought abed
without pain or grief. Where women on both their legs weare greaves of Copper: and if
a louse bite them, they are bound by duty of magnanimity to bite it again: and no maid
dare marrie, except she have first made offer of her Virginitie to the King. Where they
salute one another laying the forefinger on the ground, and then lifting it up toward

heaven: where all men bear burthens upon their head, and women on their shoulders.
Where women pisse standing, and men cowring. Where in signe of true friendship they
send one another some of their own blood, and offer incense to men which they intend to
honor, as they do to their Gods: where not only kindred and consanguinitie in the fourth
degree, but in any furthest off, can by no means be tolerated in marriages: where children
sucke till they be four, and sometimes twelve years old, in which place they deem it a
dismal thing to give a child sucke the first day of his birth. Where fathers have the charge
to punish their male children, and mothers only maidchildren, and whose punishment is to
hang them up by the feet and so to smoke them. Where women are circumcised: where
they eat all manner of herbes, without other distinction but to refuse those that have ill
savour: where all things are open, and how fair and rich soever their houses be, they have
neither doors nor windowes, nor any chests to locke: yet are all theeves much more
severely punished there than anywhere else; where, as monkies do, they kill lice with their
teeth, and think it a horrible matter to see them crusht between their nailes; where men as
long as they live never cut their hair nor pair their nailes: another place where they
only pair the nailes of their right hand, and those of the left are never cut, but very
curiously maintained: where they endeavour to cherish all the hair growing on the right
side, as long as it will grow, and very often shave away that of the left side: where in some
Provinces near unto us some women cherish their hair before, and other some that
behinde, and shave the contrary: where fathers lend their children, and husbands their
wives to their guests, so that they pay ready money: where men may lawfully get their
mothers with child: where fathers may he with their daughters and with their sons:
where in solemn assemblies and banquets, without any distinction of blood or alliance,
men will lend one another their children. In some places men feed upon humane flesh, and
in others, where it is deemed an office of pietie in children to kill their fathers at a certain
age: in other places fathers appoint what children shall live and be preserved, and which
die and be cast out, while they are yet in their mothers wombe: where old husbands lend
their wives to young men, for what use soever they please: In other places, where al
women are common without sinne or offence: indeed in some places, where for a badge of
honor they weare as many frienged tassels, fastened to the skirt of their garment, as they
have laine with severall men. Hath not custom also made a severall common-wealth of
women? has it not taught them to manage Armies? to levie Armies, to marshall men, and
to deliver battles? And that which strict-searching Philosophie could never persuade the
wisest, does she not of her own natural instinct teach it to the grosest headed vulgar? For
we know all nations, where death is not only condemned, but cherished: where children of
seven years of age, without changing of countenance, or showing any signe of dismay,
endured to be whipped to death; where riches and worldly pelfe was so despised and
holden so contemptible, that the miserablest and neediest wretch of a City would have
scorned to stoop for a purse full of gold. Havo we not heard of diverse most fertile
regions, plenteously yielding al manner of necessary victuals, where nevertheless the most
ordinary cates and daintiest dishes were but bread, water-cresses, and water? Did not
custom work this wonder in Chios, that during the space of seven hundred yeres it was
never found or heard of that any woman or maiden had her honor or honestie called in

question? And to conclude, there is nothing in mine opinion, that either she does not, or
cannot: and with reason does Pindarus, as I have heard say, call her the Queen and
Empresse of all the world. He that was met beating of his father answered, ’It was the
custom of his house; that his father had so beaten his grandfather, and he his great-
grandfather;’ and pointing to his son, said, ’This child shall also beat me when he shall
come to my age.’ And the father, whom the son hauled and dragged through thicke and
thinne in the street, commanded him to stay at a certain doore: for himself had dragged
his father no further: which were the bounds of the hereditarie and injurious demeanours
the children of that family were wont to show their fathers. ’By custom,’ says Aristotle,
’as often by sicknesse, do we see women tug and teare their haires, bite their nailes, and
eat cole and earth and more by custom than by nature do men meddle and abuse
themselves with men.’ The laws of conscience, which we say to proceed from nature, rise
and proceed of custom; every man holding in special regard and inward veneration the
opinions approved, and custo mes received about him, cannot without remorse leave them,
nor without applause applie himself unto them: when those of Creet would in former
ages curse any man, they besought the Gods to engage him in some bad custom. But the
chiefest effect of her power is to seize upon us, and so to entangle us, that it shall hardly
lie in us to free ourselves from her hold-fast, and come into our wits again, to discourse
and reason of her ordinances; verily, because we sucke them with the milke of our birth ,
and forasmuch as the worlds visage presents itself in that estate unto our first view, it
seems we are borne with a condition to follow that course. And the common
imaginations we find in credit about us, and by our fathers seed infused in our soul,
seem to be the general and natural. Whereupon it followeth, that whatsoever is beyond
the compasse of custom, we deem likewise to be beyond the compasse of reason, God
knowes how for the most part, unreasonably. If as we, who study ourselves, have learned
to do, every man that heareth a just sentence, would presently consider, how it may in
any sort belonging unto his private state, each man should find that this is not so much a
good word as a good blow to the ordinary sottishnesse of his judgment. But men receive
the admonitions of truth and her precepts, as directed to the vulgar, and never to
themselves; and in liew of applying them to their maners, most men most foolish ly and
unprofitably apply them to their memory. But let us return to customs soveraignty: such
as are brought up to liberty, and to command themselves, esteeme all other form of
policy as monstrous and against nature. Those that are enured to, Monarchie do the like.
And what facilitie soever fortune affoordeth them to change, even when with great
difficultie they have shaken off the importunitie of a tutor, they run to plant a new one
with semblable difficulties because they cannot resolve themselves to hate tutorship. It is
by the meditation of custom that every man is contented with the place where nature has
setled him; and the savage people of Scotland have nought to do with Touraine; nor the
Scithians with Thessalie. Darius demanded of certain Græcians, ’For what they would
take upon them the Indians custom, to eat their deceased fathers.’ (For such was their
manner, thinking they could not possibly give them a more noble and favourable tomb than
in their own bowels.) They answered him, ’That nothing in the world should ever bring
them to embrace so inhumane a custom.’ But having also attempted to persuade the

Indians to leave their fashion and take the Græcians, which was to burne their corpes, they
were much more astonished thereat. Every man does so, forasmuch as custom does so
bleare us that we cannot distinguish the true visage of things.
Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quicquam
Principio, quod non minuant mirarier omnes
Paulatim . -- (LUCRET. 1. ii, 1037)
Nothing at first so wondrous is, so great,
But all, t’admire, by little slake their heat.
Having other times gone about to endeare and make some one of our observations to be of
force, and which was with resolute auctoritie received in most parts about us, and not
desiring, as most men do, only to establish the same by the force of laws and examples,
but having ever bin from her beginning, I found the foundation of it so weake that
myself, who was to confirme it in others, had much adoe to keep my countenance. This
is the receipt by which Plato undertaketh to banish the unnaturall and preposterous loves
of his time, and which he esteemeth sovereign and principal: To wit, that public
opinion may condemne them; that Poets, and all men else may tell horrible tales of them.
A receit by means whereof the fairest daughters winne no more the love of their fathers,
nor brethren most excellent in beautie the love of their sisters. The very fables of
Thyestes, of Oedipus, and of Macareus, having with the pleasures of their songs infused
this profitable opinion in the tender conceit of children. Certes, chastitie is an excellent
virtue, the commoditie whereof is very well known; but to use it, and according to nature
to prevaile with it, is as hard as it is easy, to endeare it and to prevaile with it according to
custom, to laws and precepts. The first and universall reasons are of a hard
perscrutation. And our Masters pass them over in gleaning, or in not daring so much as to
taste them, at first sight cast themselves headlong into the liberty or sanctuarie of
custom. Those that will not suffer themselves to be drawne out of his original source, do
also commit a greater error, and submit themselves to savage opinions: witness
Chrysippus; who in so many severall places of his compositions, inserted the small
accompt he made of conjunctions, how incestuous soever they were. He that will free
himself from this violent prejudice of custom, shall find diverse things received with an
undoubted resolution, that have no other anker but the hoarie head and frowning wimples
of custom, which ever attends them: which maske being pulled off, and referring all
matters to truth and reason, he shall perceive his judgment, as it were overturned, and
placed in a much surer state. As for example, I will then aske him, what thing can be more
strange than to see a people bound to follow laws he never understood? Being in all his
domesticall affairs, as marriages, donations, testaments, purchases, and sales, necessarily
bound to customary rules, which forasmuch as they were never written nor published in
his own tongue, he cannot understand, and whereof he must of necessity purchase the
interpretation and use. Not according to the ingenious opinion of Isocrates, who
counselled his King ’to make the Trafikes and negotiations of his subjects free,

enfranchize and gameful, and their debates, controversies, and quarrels burthensome, and
charged with great subsidies and impositions.’ But according to a prodigious opinion, to
make open sale, and trafficke of reason itself, and to give laws a course of merchandize,
is very strange. I commend fortune for that (as our historians report) it was a Gentleman of
Gaskonie, and my Countriman, that first opposed himself against Charles the great, at
what time he went about to establish the Latine and Imperiall laws amongst us. What is
more barbarous than to see a nation, where by lawful custom the charge of judging is
sold, and judgments are paid for with readie monie; and whore justice is lawfully denied
him that has not wherewithall to pay for it; and that this merchandize has so great credit,
that in a politicall government there should be set up a fourth estate of Lawyers, breath-
sellers, and pettifoggers, and joined to the three ancient states, to wit, the Clergy, the
Nobility, and the Communaltie; which fourth state having the charge of laws, and
sometimes auctoritie of goods and lives, should make a body, apart and severall from that
of Nobilitie, whence double laws must follow, those of honor and those of justice; in
many things very contrary do those as rigorously condemne a lie pocketed up, as these a
lie revenged: by the law and light of arms he that putteth up an injurie shall be degraded
of honor and nobility; and he that revengeth himself of it, shall by the civill Law
incur a capital punishment. He that shall addresse himself to the laws to have reason
for some offence done unto his honor, dishonoureth himself. And who does not so, is by
the Lawes punished and chastised. And of these. so different parts, both nevertheless
having reference to one head; those having peace, these war committed to their charge;
those having the gain, these the honor; these knowledge, these virtue ; those reason,
these strength; those the word, these action; those justice, these valor; those reason, these
force; those a long gowne, and these a short coat, in partage and share. Touching
indifferent things, as clothes and garments, whosoever will reduce them to their true end,
which is the service and commodity of the body, whence dependeth their originall grace
and comlines, for the most fantastic to my humor that may be imagined, amongst
others I will give them our square caps; that long hood of plaited velvet, that hangs over
our womens head, with his parti-coloured traile, and that vain and unprofitable modell of
a member which we may not so much as name with modesty, whereof notwithstanding
we make public show and open demonstration. Those considerations do nevertheless
never distract a man of understanding from following the common guise. Rather, on the
contrary, me seems that all severall, strange, and particular fashions proceed rather of
folly or ambitious affectation than of true reason: and that a wise man ought inwardly to
retire his mind from the common press, and hold the same liberty and power to judge
freely of all things, but for outward matters he ought absolutely to follow the fashions and
form customarily received. Publike society has nought to do with our thoughts; but for
other things, as our actions, our travel, our fortune, and our life, that must be accomodated
and left to its service and common opinions: as that good and great Socrates, who refused
to save his life by disobeying the magistrate, indeed a magistrate most wicked and unjust. For
that is the rule of rules, and general law of laws, for every man to observe those of the
place wherein he liveth.

-- Gnom. Graec. vii.
Lawes of the native place,
To follow, is a grace.
See here some of another kind. There riseth a great doubt whether any so evident profit
may be found in the change of a received law, of what nature soever, as there is hurt in
removing the same; forasmuch as a well-setled policy may be compared to a frame or
building of diverse parts joined together with such a ligament as it is impossible to stir or
displace one, but the whole body must needs be shaken, and show a feeling of it. The
Thurians Law-giver instituted that ’whosoever would go about, either to abolish any one
of the old Lawes, or attempt to establish a new, should present himself before the people
with a rope about his necke, to the end, that if his invention were not approved of all men,
he should presently be strangled.’ And he of Lacedemon laboured all his life to get an
assured promise of his citizens, that they would never infringe any one of his ordinances.
That Ephore or Tribune, who so rudely cut off the two strings that Phrinis had added unto
music, respecteth not whether music be better or no with them, or whether the
accords of it be better filled, he has sufficient reason to condemne them, because it is an
alteration of the old form. It is that which the old rustie sword of justice of Marseille did
signify. I am distasted with noveltie, what countenance soever it show; and I have reason
so to be, for I have seen very hurtful effects follow the same. That which so many years
since does so press us, has not yet exploited all. But some alleage, with apparance, that
by accident it has produced and engendered all, indeed, both the mischiefes and ruines that
since are committed without against it; it is that a man should blame and find faulte with.
Heu patior telis vulnera facta meis. -- OVID. Epist, Phyl. 48.
Alas I suffer smart
Procured by my own dart.
Those which attempt to shake an estate, are commonly the first overthrowne by the fall of
it: he that is first mover of the same, reapeth not alwayes the fruit of such troubles; he
beats and troubleth the water for others to fish in. The contexture and combining of this
monarchie and great building, having bin dismist and disolved by it, namely in her old
years, gives as much overture and entrance as a man will to like injuries. Royall
Majestie does more hardly fall from the top to the middle, than it tumbleth down from the
middle to the bottom. But if the inventors are more damageable, the imitators are more
vicious, to cast themselves into examples, of which they have both felt and punished the
horror and mischief. And if there be any degree of hon our, even in ill doing, these are
indebted to others for the glory of the invention and courage of the first attempt. All sorts
of new licentiousnesse do perhaps draw out of this originall and fruitfull source, the images
and patterns to trouble our commonwealth. We may read in our very laws, made for the
remedie of the first evil, the apprentisage and excuse of all sorts of wicked enterprise:

And in favor of public vices, they are named with new and more pleasing words for
their excuses, bastardizing and allaying their true titles: yet it is to reforme our
consciences and our conceits, Honesta oratio est (TEREN. Andria Act. i. sc. i.) - ’It is an
honest speech and well said.’ But the best pretence of innovation or noveltie is most
dangerous: Adeo nihil motum ex antiquo probabile est. (TIT. LIV. xxxiv. 54.) So nothing
moved out of the first place is allowable.’ Yet, me seems (if I may speak boldly) that it
argueth a great self-love and presumption for a man to esteeme his opinions so far, that
for to establish them a man must be faine to subvert a public peace, and introduce so
many inevitable mischiefes, and so horrible a corruption of manners, as civill wars and
alterations of a state bring with them, in matters of such consequence, and to bring them
into his own countrie. Is it not ill husbanded to advance so many certain and known
vices, for to combate contested and debatable errors? Is ther e any worse kind of vices
than those which shocke a man’s own conscience and natural knowledge? The Senate
durst give this defeate in payment about the controversies betweene it and the people for
the mysterie of their religion: Ad deos id magis quam ad se pertinere: ipsos visuros, ne
sacra sua polluantur: (TIT. LIV. x. 6.) ’That that did rather belong to the Gods than to
them, and the Gods should looke to it, that their due rites were not polluted.’ Agreeing
with that, which the Oracle answered those of Delphos, in the Median war, fearing the
invasions of the Persians. They demanded of that God what they should do with the
treasures consecrated to his temple, whether hide or cary them away: who answered them,
that they should remove nothing, but take care of themselves, for he was able to provide
for all things that were fit for him. Christian religion has all the markes of extreme justice
and profit, but none more apparent than the exact commendation of obedience due unto
magistrate, and manute ntion of policies: what wonderful example has divine wisdom
left us, which to establish the: well-fare of humane kind, and to conduct this glorious
victory of hers against death and sinne, would not do it but at the mercy of our politik
order, and has submitted the progresse of it, and the conduct of so high and worthie
effect, to the blindnesse and injustice of our observations and customs, suffering the
innocent blood of so many her favored elect to run, and allowing a long loss of years for
the ripening of this inestimable fruit? There is much difference betweene the cause of him
that followeth the formes and laws of his countrie, and him that undertaketh to governe
and change them. The first alleageth for his excuse, simplicitie, obedicnce, and example;
whatsoever he does cannot be malice, at the most it is but ill lucke. Quis est enim, que non
moveat clarissimis monumentis testata consignataque antiquitas? (CIC. Div. 1. i.) ’For
who is he whom antiquitie will not move, being witnessed and si gned with former
monuments?’ Besides that which Isocrates says that defect has more part in moderation,
than has excess. The other is in much worse case. For he that meddles with causing and
changing, usurpeth the authority of judging: and must resolve himself to see the fault of
what he hunteth for, and the good of what he bringeth in. This so vulgar consideration
has confirmed me in my state, and restrained my youth, that was more rash, from
burthening my shoulders with so filthie a burden, as to make my self respondent of so
important a science. And in this to dare, what in sound judgement I durst not in the easiest
of those wherein I had been instructed, and wherein the rashnesse of judging is of no

prejudice. Seeming most impious to me, to go about to subject public constitutions and
unmoveable observances, to the instabilitie of a private fantasie (private reason is but a
private jurisdiction) and to undertake that on divine laws, which no policy would tolerate
in civill law. Wherein although man’s reason have much more commerce, yet are they
soveraignly judges of their judges: and their extreme sufficiencie serveth to expound
custom and extend the use that of them is received, and not to divert and innovate the
same. If at any time divine providence has gone beyond the rules to which it has
necessary constrained us, it is not to give us a dispensation from them. They are blowes of
her divine hand, which we ought not imitate, but admire: as extraordinarie examples,
markes of an express and particular avowing of the severall kinds of wonders, which for
a testimony of her ominpotencie it offereth us, beyond our orders and forces, which it is
folly and impiety to go abont to represent, and which we onght not follow but
contemplate with admiration, and meditate with astonishment. Acts of her personage, and
not of ours. Cotta protesteth very opportunely; Quum de religione agitur, T.
Coruncanium, P. Scipionem, P. Scævolam, Pontifices maximos, non Zenonem, aut
Cleanthem, aut Chrysippum sequor: (1 CIC. De. Nat. 1. iii. c. 2.) ’When we talk of
religion, I follow Titus Coruncanium, Publius Scipio, P. Scævola, and the professors of
religion, not Zeno, Cleanthes, or Chrysippus.’ May God know it in our present quarrel,
wherein are a hundred articles, indeed, great and deepe articles, to be removed and alterd,
although many there are who may boast to have exactly survaid the reasons and
foundations of one and another faction. It is a number, if it be a number, that should have
no great meane to trouble us. But whither goeth all this other throng? Under what colours
does it quarter itself? It followeth of theirs, as of other weake and ill applied medicines,
the humors that it would have purged in us, it has enflamed, exasperated, and sharpned,
by her conflict, and still do remaine in our bodies. It could not by reason of her weaknesse
purge us, but has rather weakned us; so that we cannot now void it, and by her operation
we reap nothing but long, continuall, and intestine griefes and aches, yet is it, that fortune,
ever reserving her authority above our discourses, does sometimes present us the urgent
necessitie, that laws must need yield her some place: And when a man resisteth the
increase of an innovation, brought in by v iolence, to keep himself each-where and
altogether in rule and bridle against those that have the keyes of fields, to whom all things
are lawfull, that may in any sort advance their design, that have not law, nor order, but
to follow their advantage, it is a dangerous obligation and prejudiciall inequalitie.
Aditum nocendi perfido prostat fides. -- SEN. Oed. act. iii. sc. 1.
Trust in the untrustee, may
To hurt make open way .
For so much as the ordinary discipline of an estate, th at has his perfect health, does not
provide for these extraordinarie accidents, it presupposeth a body holding itself in his
principal members and offices, and a common consent to observe and obey it. Lawfull
proceeding is a cold, dull, heavy, and forced proceeding: and is not like to hold out

against a licentious and unbridled proceeding. It is yet, as all men know, a reproach to
those two great personages, Octavius and Cato, in their civill wars: the one of Scilla, the
other of Cæsar, because they rather suffered their countrie to incur all extremities, than by
her laws to aid her, or to innovate anything. For truly in these last necessities, where
nothing is left to take hold by, it were. Peradventure better to shrug the shoulders, stoop
the head, and somewhat yield to the stroke, than beyond possibilitie to make head and
resist, and be nothing the better, and give violence occasion to trample all underfoot: and
better were it to force the laws to desire but what they may, since they may not what they
would. So did he that ordained them to sleepe foure and twentie hours: And he who for a
time removed one day from the Calendar: And another who of the moneth of June made a
second May. The Lacedemonians themselves, so strict observers of their countries
ordinances, being urged by their Lawes, which precisely forbid and inhibited to chuse one
man twice to be their Admiral, and on the other side their affairs necessarily requiring
that Lysander should once more take that charge upon him, they created one Aracus
Admiral, but instituted Lysander superintendent of all maritime causes. And with the
same sutteltie, one of their Ambassadors being sent to the Athenians for to obtaine the
change of some ordinance, Pericles alleging that it was expresly forbid to remove the
table wherein a law had once been set down, persuaded him but to turn, for that was
not forbidden. It is that whereof Plutarke commendeth Philopæmen, who being borne to
command, could not only command according to the laws, but the laws themselves,
whensoever public necessitie required it.



Return to


CHAPTER XXIII: DIVERS EVENTS FROM ONE SELFSAME COUNSELL





nonpfit and educational purposes only.
CHAPTER XXIII: DIVERS EVENTS FROM ONE SELFSAME COUNSELL
AMES AMIOT, great Almoner of France, did once tell me this story,
to the honor of one of our Princes (and so he was indeed by very good
tokens, albeit by offspring he were a stranger), that during our first
troubles, at the siege of Roane, the said Prince being advertised by the
Queene-mother of a conspiracie and enterprise that should be attempted
against his life, and by letters particularly informed him of the partie
that should performe it, who was a gentleman of Anjow, or Manse, and who to that
purpose did ordinarily frequent the said Princes court; he never imparted that secret or
communicated that warning to any man, but the next morrow walking upon Saint
Catherins hill, whence our battery played against the town (for it was, at what time we
laid siege to Roane) with the said Lord great Almoner and another Bishop by his side, he
chanced to descrie the said gentleman, whom the Queene-mother had described unto him,
and caused him to be called, who being come before his presence, said thus unto him,
perceiving him alreadie to wax pale and tremble at the alarums of his conscience: Master,
such a one, I am fully persuaded you fore-imagine what I will charge you with, and your
countenance does plainly show it, you can conceal nothing from me: for I am so well
instructed of your business that would you go about to hide it, you should but marre all,

you have perfect knowledge of this and this thing (which were the chiefest props and
devices of the secretest drifts of his complot and conspiracie) faile not therefore, as you
tender your life, to confesse the truth of all your purpose.’ When the silly man saw
himself so surprised and convicted (for the whole matter had been discovered unto
Queene by one of the complices) he had no other way but to lift up his hands and beg for
grace and mercy at the Princes hands, at whose feete he would have prostrated himself,
but that he would not let him: thus following his discourse: ’Come hither my friend,’ said
he, ’Did I ever do you any displeasure? Have I ever through any particular hatred
wronged or offended any friends of yours? It is not yet three weekes since I knew you,
what reason might move you to conspire and enterprise my death?’ The gentleman with a
faint trembling voice, and self-accusing looke, answered him, that no particular occasion
had ever moved him to that, but the interest of the general cause of his faction, and that
some of them had persuaded him, that to root out, and in what manner soever, to make
away so great an enemy of their religion, would be an execution full of pietie, and a work
of supererogation. Then said the Prince, ’I show you how much the religion which I profess
is more mild than that whereof you make profession: yours has persuaded you to kill
me, without hearing me, having never been offended by me: and mine commands me to
pardon you, convicted as you are, that you would so treacherously and without cause
have killed me. Goe your way, withdraw your self, let me never see you here again, and
if you be wise, henceforward in your enterprises take honester men for your counsellers
than those of your religion.’ The Emperor Augustus being in Gaule, received certain
advertisement of a conspiracie, that L. Cinna complotted against him, whereof he
purposed to be avenged, and for that purpose sent to all his friends against the next
morrow for advice and counsell, but passed the fore-going night with great anxietie and
unrest, considering that following his intent, be should bring a yong Gentleman, well
borne, of a noble house, and great Pompeyes nephew, to his death: which perplexitie
produced diverse stran ge discourses and consideration in him. ’What,’ says he unto
himself, ’shall it ever be reported, that I do live in fear, and suffer mine enemy to
walke at his pleasure and liberty? Shall he then go free, that has attempted and
resolved to deprive me of my life, which both by sea and land I have saved from so many
civill wars, and from so many battles? And now that I have stablished an universall
peace in the world, shall he be absolved and go unpunished, that has not only
determined to murther, but sacrifice me?’ (For, the complot of the conspiracie was to
murther him when he should be at sacrifice.) After that, having taken some rest with
himself, he with a lowder voice began to exclaime and cry out against himself, saying,
’Why livest you, if the lives of so many depend on your death? Shall your vengeance and
cruelties never have an end? Is your life of that worth, as it may countervaile the sundry
mischiefes that arelike to ensue, if it be preserved?’ Livia his wife being in bed with him,
perceiving his agonie and hearing his speeches, says thus unto him: ’And may not womens
counsells be admitted? Doe as Physitians are wont, who when their ordinairie receipts
will not work, have recourse to the contrary. Hitherto you couldest never do any good
with severitie: Lepidus has followed Savidienus Murena Lepidus, Coepio Murena,
Egnatius Scoepio; begin now to prove what a good lenitie and clemencie will do you:

Cinna is convicted, pardon him: To annoy or hurt you now he is not able, and you shall
thereby increase your glory.’ Augustus seemed very glad to have found an Advocate of his
humor, and having thanked his wife, and countermanded his friends whom he had
summoned to the Counsell, commanded Cinna to be brought before him alone. Then
sending all men out of his chamber, and a chaire prepared for Cinna to sit in, he thus
bespoke him: ’First, Cinna, I require to have a gentle audience, and that you wilt not
interrupt my speech, which ended, I will give you time and leisure to answer me: Thou
knowest (oh Cinna) that when I had taken you prisoner in mine enemies campe, who were
not only become, but borne my foe; I saved you, then put you in quiet possession of your
goods, and at last, have so enriched you, and placed you in so high a degree, that even
the conquerours are become envious over the conquered. The Priests office, which you
beggedst at my hands, I freely bestowed on you, having first refused the same to others,
whose fathers and friends had in many battles shed their blood for me: After all which
benefits, and that I had in dutie tied you so fast unto me, you hast notwithstanding
undertaken to kill me.’ To whom Cinna replied, crying alowd, ’That he had never so much
as conceived so wicked a thought, much less entertained the same.’ ’Oh Cinna, this is not
according to your promise,’ answered then Augustus, ’which was that you would not
interrupt me: What I say is true, you hast undertaken to murther me in such a place on
such a day, in such a company. and in such manner:’ and seeing him so amazed in heart,
and by his evidence strucken dumbe, moved thereunto, not by the condition of his
promise, but by the guilt of his self-accusing conscience; ’why would you do it,’
replied he, ’is it because you would be Emperor? Truly the commonwealth is but in
hard condition, if none but myself hinder you from the Empire. Thou canst not so much
as defend thine own hous and didst but lately lose a processe only by the favor of a seely
libertine. What, hast you no meane of power in any other matter, but to attempt Cæsars
life? I quit it, if there be no man but my self to impeach your hopes. Supposest you that
Paulus, that Fabius, that the Cossenians, or the Servillianes will ever permit you? And so
great a troupe of noble men, noble not only in name, but such as by their virtues honor
their nobility, will ever suffer it?’ After many other such like discourses (for he talked
with him more than two hours) he said unto him: ’Away, oh Cinna, that life which once I
gave you, as to an enemy, I now give you again, as to a traitour and a patricide: let a
true friendship from this day forward begin betweene us, let us strive together which of us
two with a better faith shall out-go the other, and whether I have given your life, or you
hast received the same with great confidence:’ and so left him. Shortly after he gave him
the Consulship, blaming him that he durst not aske it of him. And ever after held him as
his dear friend, and made him alone heir and executor of his goods. Now after this
accident, which hapned to Augustus in the xl yeare of his age, there was never any
conspiracie or enterprise attempted against him; and he received a just reward for his so
great clemency. But the like succeeded not to one Prince, for his mildness and lenitie
could not so warrant him, but that afterward he fell into the snares of the like treason: so
vain and frivolous a thing is humane wisdom: and contrary to all projects, devices,
counsels and precautions, fortune does ever keep a full sway and possession of all events.
We count those Physitians happy and successful, that successfully end a desperate cure, or

come to a good issue: as if there were no other art but theirs, that could not subsist of
itself, and whose foundations were too feeble to stand and rely upon h er own strength:
and as if there were none but it, that stands in need of fortunes helpe-affoording hand, for
the effecting of her operations. My conceit of it is, both the worst and the best a man may
imagine: for, thankes be to God, there is no commerce betweene us: I am contrary to
others: for I ever despise it, and when I am sick, instead of entring into league or
composition with it, I then beginne to hate and fear it most: and answer such as urge me
to take Physicke, that at least they will tarie till such time as I have recovered my health
and strength again; that then I may the better be enabled to endure the violence and
hazard of their potions. I let nature work, and presuppose unto my self that she has
provided herself, both of teeth and clawes, to defend herself from such assaults as shall
beset her, and to maintaine this contexture or frame, whose dissolution it so much hateth.
In liew of bringing helpe unto her when she most striveth, and is combated by sicknesse I
greatly fear lest I bring succor unto her adversarie, and surcharge her with new enemies.
Now I conclude, that not only in Physicke, but likewise in sundry more certain arts,
fortune, has great share in them. The Poeticall furies, which ravish and transport their
Author beyond himself, why shall we not ascribe them to his good fortune, since
himself confesseth that they exceed his strength and sufficiencie, and acknowledgeth to
proceed from elsewhere than from himself, and that they are not in his power, no more
than Orators say to have those strange motions and extraordinary agitations, that in their
art transport them beyond their purpose? The like we see to be in painting, for
sometimes the Painters hand shall draw certain lines or draughts, so far exceeding his
conception or skill, that himself is forced to enter into admiration and amazement. But
fortune yet does much more evidently show the share she has in all their workes, by the
graces and beauties that often are found in them, not only beyond the intent, but besides
the very knowledge of the workman. A heedy Reader shall often discover in other mens
compositions, perfections far differing from the Authors meaning, and such as perhaps he
never dreamed of, and illustrateth them with richer senses and more excellent
constructions. As for military enterprises, no man is so blinde but seeth what share fortune
has in them : even in our counsels and deliberations, some chance or good lucke must
needs be joined to them, for whatsoever our wisdom can affect is no great matter. The
sharper and quicker it is, more weaknesse findes it in itself, and so much the more does
it distrust itself. I am of Sillæs opinion: and when I nearest consider the most glorious
exploits of war, me thinkes I see, that those who have the conduct of them, employ
neither counsell nor deliberation about them, but for fashion-sake, and leave the best part
of the enterprise to fortune, and on the confidence they have in her ayd, they still go
beyond the limits of all discourse. Casuall rejoycings, and strange furies ensue among
their deliberations, which for the most induce them to take the counsell least grounded
upon apparance or reason, and which quaile their courage beyond reason; whence it has
succeeded unto diverse great Captains, by giving credit to such rash counsels; and
alleging to their soldiers, that by some divine inspiration, and other signes and
prognostications, they were encouraged to such and such enterprises. See here why
in this uncertaintie and perplexitie, which the impuissances and inabilitie does bring us to

see and chuse what is most commodious for the difficulties which the diverse accidents and
circumstances of everie thing draw with them: the surest way, if other considerations did
not invite us thereto, is, in my conceit, to follow the partie, wherein is most honestie and
justice; a nd since a man doubteth of the nearest way, ever to keep the right. As in these
two examples I have lately mentioned, there is no doubt but that it was more
commendable and generous in him who had received the offence, to remit and pardon the
same, than to have done otherwise. If the first had but ill-success, his good intent is not to
be blamed; and no man knows, had be taken the contrary way, whether he should have
escaped the end, to which destinie called him; and then had he lost the glory and
commendations of so seld-seen humanitie. Sundrie men possessed with this fear, are
read-of in ancient Histories; the greatest part of which have followed the way of fore-
running the conspiracies which were complotted against them, by revenge or tortures, but
I see very few, that by this remedy have received any good; witness so many Roman
Emperours. He that perceiveth himself to be in this danger ought not much to rely upon
his power, or hope in his vigilancie. For, how hard a matter is it for a man to warrant and
safeguard himself from an enemy, that masks under the visage of the most officious and
heartie-seeming friend we have? And to know the inward thoughts and mind-concealed
meanings of such as daily attend, and are continually with us? It will little avail him to
have foraine nations to his guard, and ever to be encircled about with troupes of Armed
men? whosoever he be that resolveth to condemne his own life, may at any time become
Master of other mens lives. Moreover, that continual suspicion which makes the Prince to
mistrust every body, should be a wonderful vexation to his mind. And therefore when
Dion was advertised that Calippus watched to kill him, could never find in his heart to
informe himself of it: affirming: ’He had rather die once, than ever live in fear and
misery, and to guard himself not only from his enemies, but from his very friends.’
Which thing Alexander presented more lively and undantedly by effect, who by a letter of
Parmenio having received advertisement that Philip, his neerest and best regarded
Physitian, had with money been suborned and corrupted by Darius to poison him, who at
the very instant that he gave Philip the letter to read, swallowed down a potion he had
given him: was it not to express his resolution, that if his friends would kill him he would
not shun them, but consent to their treachery? This Prince is the Soveraigne patterne of
hazardous attempt s: yet know I not whether in all his life he showed an act of more
resolute constancy than this, nor an ornament so many ways famous. Those which daily
preach and buzze in Princes ears, under colour of their safetie, a heedy diffidence and
everwarie distrustfulnesse, do nought but tell them of their ruine, and further their shame
and downefall. No noble act is atchieved without danger. I know one by his own
complexion, of a right martial courage and ready for any resolution, whose good and
hopefull fortune is dayly corrupted by such verball persuasion; as first to keep close with
his friends; never to listen to any reconciliation with his old enemies: to stand upon his
own guard; never to commit himself to any stronger than himself, what fair promise
soever they make him, or whatsoever apparant profit they seem to containe. I also know
another, who because he did ever follow the contrary counsell, and would never listen to
such schoole- reasons, has beyond all hope raised his fortune above the common reach.

That boldness wherewith they so greedily gape after glory, is alwayes at hand, when ever
need shall be, as gloriously in a doublet as in an armour; in a cabinet as in a campe; the
arm held down, as lifted up. A wisdom so tenderly precise, and so precisely
circumspect, is a mortal enemy to haughty executions. Scipio, to sound the depth of
Siphax intent, and to discover his mind; leaving his army, and abandoning the yet
unsetled country of Spain, which under his new conquest of it was likely to be suspected,
he, I say, could pass into Affrike only with two simple ships or small barkes, to commit
himself in a strange and foe countrie, to engage his person, under the power of a
barbarous King, under an unknown faith, without either hostage or letters of credence,
indeed, without any body, but only upon the assurance of the greatness of his courage, of
his successeful good fortune, and of the promise of his high-raised hopes. Habita fides
ipsam plerumque fidem obligat: ’Most commonly trusting obligeth trustinesse.’ To an
ambitious and fame aspiring mind, contrariwise, a man must yield little, and cary a hard
hand against suspicions: Fear and distrust draw on offences and allure them. The most
mistrustful of our Kings established his affairs, and setled his estate, especially because
he had voluntarily given over, abandoned and committed his life and liberty, to the hands
and mercy of his enemies: Seeming to put his whole confidence in them, that so they
might likewise conceive an,undoubted affiance in him. Cæsar did only confront his
mutinous legions, and oppose his hardly-ruled Armies, with the mind-quelling authority
of his countenance, and awe-moving fiercenesse of his words: and did so much trust
himself and his fortune, that he no whit feared to abandon and commit himself to a
seditious and rebellious Armie.
-- stetit aggere fulti
Caespitis, intrepidus vultu, meritque timeri
Nil metuens. -- 1 LUCAN. 1. iii. 296.
He on a rampart stood of turfe upreard,
Fearlesse and following none, was to be fear’d.
True it is, that this undaunted assurance cannot so fully and lively be represented, but by
those in whom the imagination or apprehension of death, and of the worst that may
happen, can strike no amazement at all: for, to represent it fearfully-trembling, doubtful
and uncertaine, for the service of an important reconciliation, is to effect no great matter:
It is an excellent motive to gain the heart and good will of others, for a man to go and
submit himself to them, provided it be done freely, and without constraint of any
necessitie, and in such sort that a man bring a pure and unspotted confidence with him,
and at least his countenance void of all scruple. Being yet a child, I saw a gentleman who
had the command of a great City, and by a commotion. of a seditiously furious people
greatly put to his plunges, who to suppresse the rising fire of his tumult, resolved to sally
out from a strongly assured place, where he was safe, and yield himself to that many-
headed monster mutinous rowt; thrived so ill by it that he was miserably slain amongst
them: yet deem I not this oversight to have beent so great in issuing out, his memory

being of most men condemned, as because he took away his submission and
remissenesse, and attempted to exunguish that rage and hurly-bur ly rather by way of
following than of guiding, and by requiring sute than by demonstrative resolution; and I
deem, a gratiously mild severetie, with a militaire commandement, full of confidence
and securitie, beseeming his rank and the dignitie of his charge, had better availed him,
had become more successfull, at least with more honor, and well-seeming comlinesse.
There is nothing less to be expected or hoped for at the hands of this monstrous faced
multitude, thus agitated by fury, than humanitie and gentlenesse; it will much sooner
receive reverence and admit fear. I might also blame him, that having undertaken a
resolution (in my judgment, rather brave than rash) to caste himself inconsiderately,
weake and unarmed, amidst a tempestuous ocean of senselesse and mad men, he should
have gone through stitch with it, and not leave the person he represented in the briers,
whereas after he had perceived the danger at hand, he chanced to bleed at the nose; and
then to change that demiss and flattering countenance he had undertaken into a dismaid
and drooping looke, filling both voice and eyes with astonishment and repentance: and
seeking. to squat himself, he the more enflamed and called them upon him. It was
determined there should be a general muster made of diverse troupes of armed men (a
place fittest for secret revenges, and where they may safest be achieved) there were most
apparent reasons, that the place was very unsure, or at least, to be suspected, by such as
were to have the principal and necessary charge to survey them. Divers counsels were
proposed, sundry opinions heard, as in a subject of great difficultie, and on which
depended so many weightie consequences. My advice was, they should carefully avoid to
give any testimony of suspition or show of doubt, and that our troupes should be as full as
might be, and the Fyles orderly ranked, and every Souldier show an undaunted carriage
and undismayed countenance, and instead of keeping some of our forces backe (which
thing most opinions aimed at) all Captains should he put in mind to admonish their
Soldiers to make their sallies as orderly and as strong as might be, in honor of the
assistance; and spare no powder, which would serve as a gratification toward these
suspectfull troupes, which afterward caused a mutual and profitable confidence. I find
the course that Julius Cæsar held to be the best a man may take: First he assayed by
clemencie to purchase the love of his very enemies, contenting himself in the
conspiracies that were discovered unto him, simply to show they were not unknown to
him, but, had perfect notice of them. That done, he took a most noble resolution, which
was, without dread or dismay, or any care-taking, to attend whatsoever might betide him,
wholy abandoning and remitting himself into the hands of the Gods and of fortune. For
certainely, it is the state wherein he was, when he was murthered in the Senate. A stranger
having published ere that he could teach Dionysius the tyrant of Siracusa a way to
understand and discover the very certaintie of all the practices his subjects or any else
should practise against him, if he could bestowe a good summe of money upon him:
Dionysius being thereof advertised, sent for him, to discover the secret, and understand
the truth of so necessarie an art for this preservation: the stranger told him, there was no
other skill in his art, but that he should deliver him a talent, and then boast he had learned
the use of so unvaluable a secret of him. Dionysius allowed of his invention, and forthwith

caused six hundred crownes to be delivered him. It is not likely that ever he would have
given so great a summe of mony to an unknown man, but in reward of a most profitable
instruction; for by way of this reputation he kept his enemies still in awe. And therefore
do Princes wisely publish such advertisements as they receive of the plots conspired, and
treasons practised against their lives and states, thereby to make men believe, that nothing
can be attempted against them, but they shall have knowledge of it. The Duke of Athens
committed many foolish oversights in the establishing of his late tyrannie upon the
Florentines, but this the chiefest, that having received the first advertisement of the
Monopolies and Complots the Florentines contrived against him, by Mathew, surnamed
Morozo, one of the complices, thinking to suppresse this warning, and conceal that any
in the City were offended at him, or grudged at his rule, caused him immediately to be put
to death. I remember to have heretofore read the story of a Roman (a man of speciall
dignitie) who flying the tyrannie of the Triumvirate, had many times by the sutteltie of his
invention, escaped those who pursued him. It fortuned upon a day, that a troupe of horse-
men, who had the charge to apprehend him, passing alongst a hedge under which he lay
lurking, had well-nigh discovered him; which he perceiving, and considering the dangers
and difficulties he had so long endured, thinking to save himself from the continuall and
daily searches that every where were made after him, and calling to mind the small
pleasure he might hope of such a life, and how much better it were for him to die at once
than live in such continuall fear and agonie, himself called them, and voluntarily
discovered his lurking hole, and that he might rid them and himself from further pursuit
and care, did willingly yield unto their crueltie. For a man to call his enemies to aid him,
is a counsell somewhat rash, yet think I it were better to embrace it, then remaine still in
the continuall fit of such a fever that has no remedie. But since the provisions of man
may apply unto it, are full of unquietnesse and uncertaintie, much better is it with a full
assurance to prepare himself patiently to end ure whatsoever may happen, and draw
some comfort from that which a man is never sure shall come to pass.



Return to


CHAPTER XXIV. OF PEDANTISME.






CHAPTER XXIV OF PEDANTISME
I HAVE in my youth oftentimes been vexed to see a Pedant brought
in, in most of Italian comedies, for a vice or sport-maker, and the nicke-
name of Magister to be of no better signification amongst us. For, my
self being committed to their tuition, how could I chuse but he
somewhat jealous of their reputation? In deed I sought to excuse them
by reason of the natural disproportion that is betweene the vulgar sort,
and rare and excellent men, both in judgment and knowledge: forasmuch as they take a
cleane contrary course one from another. But when I considered the choysest men were
they that most contemned them, I was far to seek, and as it were lost my self: witness
our good Bellay:
Mais je hay par sur tout un scavoir pedantesque.
A pedant knowledge, I
Detest out of all cry.

Yet is this custom very ancient; for Plutarke says, that Greeke and Scholer were
amongst the Romans words of reproach and reputation. And coming afterwards to years
of more discretion, I have found they had great reason, and that magis magnos clericos,
non sunt magis magnas sapientes: ’The most great Clerkes are not the most wisest men.
But whence it may proceed, that a mind rich in knowledge, and of so many things,
becomes thereby never livelier nor more quickesighted; and a grose-headed and vulgar
spirit may without amendment containe the discourse and judgement of the most excellent
wits the world ever produced, I still remaine doubtfull. To receive so many, so strange,
indeed so great wits, it must needs follow (said once a Lady unto me, indeed one of our
chiefest Princesses, speaking of some body) that a man’s own wit, force, droops, and as
it were diminishes itself, to make roome for others. I might say, that as plants are choked
by over-much moisture, and lampe dammed with too much oyle, so are the actions of the
mind over-whelmed by over-abundance of matter and studie: which occupied and
intangled with so great a diversitie of things, loses the meane to spread and clear itself
and that surcharge keepeth it low-drooping, and faint. But it is otherwise, for our mind
stretch the more by how much more it is replenished. And in examples of former times,
the contrary is seen, of sufficient men in the managin g of public affairs, of great
Captains, and notable Counsellers in matters of estate, to have been therewithall
excellently wise. And concerning Philosophers, retired from all public negotiations, they
have indeed sometimes been vilified by the comike liberty of their times, their opinions
and demeanors yielding them ridiculous. Will you make them Judges of the right of a
processe, or of the actions of a man? They are readie for it. They enquire whether there be
any life yet remaining, wheth er any motion. Whether man be any thing but an Oxe, what
working or suffering is; what strange beasts law and justice are. Speake they of the
Magistrate, or speak they unto him; they do it with an unreverent and uncivill liberty.
Heare they a Prince or a King commended? He is but a shepherd to them, as idle as a
Swaine busied about milking of his cattell, or shearing of his sheepe: but more rudely.
Esteeme you any man for possessing two hundred acres of land? They scoffe at him, as
men accustomed to embrace all the world as their possession. Do you boast of your
Nobilitie, because you can blazon your descent of seven or eight rich Grandafthers? They
will but little regard you, as men that conceive not the universall image of nature, and how
many predecessors every one of us has had, both rich and poore, Kings and groomes,
Greekes and Barbarians. And were you lineally descended in the fiftieth degree from
Hercules, they deem it a vanity to vaunt or allege this gift of fortune. So did the vulgar
sort disdaine them as ignorant of the first and common things, and as presumptuous and
insolent. But this Platonicall lustre is far from that which our men stand in need of. They
were envied as being beyond the common sort, as despising public actions, as having
proposed unto themselves a particular and inimitable life, aiming and directed at certam
high discourses, and from the common use; these are disdained as men beyond the
ordinary fashion, as incapable of public charges, as leading an unsociable life, and
professing base and abject customs, after the vulgar kind. Odi homines ignavos opere,
Philosophos sententia: (Pacuvius, Lips. i. 10) I hate men that are fooles in working, and

Philosophers in speaking. As for those Philosophers, I say, that as they were great in
knowledge, so were they greater in all action. And even as they report of that Syracusan
Geometrician, who being taken from his bookish contemplation to show some practice of
his sk ill, for the defense of his countrie reared sodainly certain terror-moving engines,
and showed effects far exceeding all mens conceit, himself notwithstanding disdaining
all this his handieworke, supposing he had thereby corrupted the dignitie of his art; his
engines and manuall works being but the apprentiships, and trials of his skill in sport: So
they, if at any time they have been put to the trial of any action, they have been seen to
flie so high a pitch, and with so lofty a flight, that men might apparently see their minds
and spirits were through the intelligence of things become wonderfully rich and great. But
some perceiving the seat of politike government possessed by unworthy and incapable
men, have withdrawne themselves from it. And he who demanded of Crates, how long
men should Philosophize, received this answer, Untill such time as they who have the
conduct of our Armies be no longer blockish asses. Heraclitus resigned the royalty unto
his brother. And to the Ephesians, who reproved him for spending his time in playing with
children before the temple: he answered And is it not better to do so, than to governe the
public affairs in your companie? Others having their imagination placed yond fortune
and the world, found the seat of justice, and the thrones of Kings, to be but base and vile.
And Empedocles refused the royalty which the Agrigentines offered him. Thales
sometimes accusing the carke and care men took about good busbandry, and how to
grow rich; some replied unto him, that he did as the Fox, because he could not attaine unto
it himself; which hearing, by way of sport he would show by experience how he
could at his pleasure become both thriftie and rich; and bending his wits to gain and
profit, erected a traffike, which within one yeare brought him such riches as the skilfullest
in trade of thriving could hardly in all their life devise how to get the like. That which
Aristotle reporteth of some who called both him and Anaxagoras, and such like men, wise
and not prudent, because they cared not for things more profitable: besides, I do not very
well digest this nice difference of words that serveth my find-fault people for no excuse:
and to see the base and needie fortune wherewith they are content, we might rather have
just cause to pronounce them neither wise nor prudent. I quit this first reason, and think it
better to say, that this evil proceedeth from the bad course they take to follow sciences;
and that respecting the manner we are instructed in them, it is no wonder if neither
Schollers nor Masters, howbeit they may prove more learned become no whit more
sufficient. Verily the daily care and continuall charges of our fathers aymeth at nothing so
much as to store our heads with knowledge and-learning; as for judgement and virtue, that
is never spoken of. If a man pass by, crie out to our people: Oh what a wise man goeth
yonder! And of another: Oh what a good man is yonder! he will not faile to cast his eyes
and respect toward the former. A third crier were needfull, to say, Oh what blocke-heads
are those! We are ever readie to aske, Hath he any skill in the Greeke and Latine tongue?
can he write well? does he write in prose or verse? But whether he be grown better or
wiser, which should be the chiefest of his drift, that is never spoken of. We should rather
enquire who is better wise than who is more wise. We labor, and toyle, and plod to fill
the memory, and leave both understanding and conscience empty. Even as birds flutter

and skip from field to field to pecke up corne, or any graine, and without tasting the same,
carrie it in their bils, therewith to feed their little ones; so do our pedants gleane and
picke learning from bookes, and never lodge it further than their lips, only to degorge and
cast it to the wind. It is strange how fitly sottishnesse takes bold of mine example. Is not
that which I do in the greatest part of this composition, all one and self same thing? I am
ever here and there picking and culling, from this and that book, the sentences that
please me, not to keep them (for I have no store-house to reserve them in) but to
transport them into this: where, to say truth, they are no more mine than in their first
place: we are (in mine opinion) never wise, but by present learning, not by that which is
past, and as little by that which is to come. But which is worse, their Schollers and their
little ones are never a whit the more fed or better nourished: but passeth from hand to
hand, to this end only, thereby to make a glorious show, therewith to entertaine others, and
with its help to frame some quaint stories, or prettie tales, as of a light and counterfeit
coyne unprofitable for any use or employment, but to reckon and cast accompts. Apud
alios loqui didicerunt, non ipsi secum. Non est loq uendum, sed gubernandum: (SEN.
Epist. cviii.) They have learned to speak with others, not with themselves: speaking is not
so requisite as government. Nature, to show that nothing is savage in whatsoever she
produces, causeth oftentimes, even in rudest and most unarted nations, productions of
spirits to arise, that confront and wrestle with the most artist productions. As concerning
my discourse, is not the Gaskonie proverbe, drawne from a bagpipe, prettie and quaint?
Bouha prou houha, mas a remuda lous dits qu’em: You may blow long enough, but if once
you stir your fingers, you may go seek We can talk and prate, Cicero says thus,
These are Platoes customs, These are the very words of Aristotle; but what say we our
selves? what do we? what judge we? A Peroquet would say as much. This fashion puts
me in mind of that rich Roman, who to his exceeding great charge had been very
industrious to find out the most sufficient men in all sciences, which he continually kept
about him, that if at any time occasion should be moved amongst his friends to speak of
any matter pertaining to Schollership, they might supplie his place, and be readie to assist
him: some with discourse, some with a verse of Homer, othersome with a sentence, each
one according to his skill or profession; who persuaded himself that all such learning
was his own, because it was contained in his servants minds. As they do whose
sufficiencie is placed in their sumptuous libraries. I know some, whom if I aske what he
knows, he will require a book to demonstrate the same, and durst not dare to tell me
that his posteriors are scabious, except he turn over his Lexicon to see what posteriors
and scabious is. We take the opinions and knowledge of others into our protection, and
that is all; I tell you they must be enfeoffed in us, and made our own. We may very well
be compared unto him, who having need of fire, should go fetch some at his neighbors
chimney, where finding a good fire, should there stay to warme himself, forgetting to
carrie some home. What availes it us to have our bellies full of meat, if it be not digested?
If it be not transchanged in us? except it nourish, augment, and strengthen us. We may
imagine that Lucullus, whom learning made and framed so great a captaine without
experience, would have taken it after our manner? We rely so much upon other mens
arms, that we disanull our own strength. Will I arm my self against the fear of death?

it is at Seneca’s cost: will I draw comfort either for my self, or any other? I borrow the
same of Cicero. I would have taken it in my self, had I been exercised unto it: I love not
this relative and begd-for sufficiencie. Suppose we may be learned by other mens
learning. Sure I am we can never be wise but by our own wisdom.
Μισω σοφιστην, οστις ουχ αυτω σοφος. --Proverb. Iamb.
That wise man I cannot abide,
That for himself cannot provide.
Ex quo Ennius: Nequidquam sapere sapientem, qui ipso ibi prodesse non quiret.
Whereupon says Ennius: That wise man is vainly wise, who could not profit himself.
----- si cupidus, si
Vanus, et Euganea quantumvis vilior agna. Juven. Sat. viii. 14.
If covetous, if vain (not wise)
Than any lambe more base, more nice.
Non enim paranda nobis solum, sed fruenda sapientia est: (Cic. Finib. i.p.). For we
must not only purchase wisdom, but enjoy and employ the same. Dionysius scoffeth at
those Gramarians, who ploddingly labor to know the miseries of Ulysses, and are
ignorant of their own; mocketh those musitians that so attentively tune their instruments,
and never accord their manners; derideth those orators that study to speak of justice, and
never put it in execution. Except our mind be the better, unless our judgement be the
sounder, I had rather my scholler had employed his time in playing at tennis; I am sure his
body would be the nimbler. See but one of these our universitie men or bookish schollers
return from schole, after he has there spent ten or twelve years under a pedants charge:
who is so inapt for any matter? who so unfit for any companie? who so to seek if he
come into the world? all the advantage you discover in him is that his Latine and Greeke
have made him more sottish, more stupid, and more presumptuous, than before he went
from home. Whereas he should return with a mind full-fraught, he returnes with a wind-
puft conceit: instead of plum-feeding the same, he has only spunged it up with vanity.
These masters, as Plato speaks of sophisters (their cosin Germanes) of all men, are
those that promise to be most profitable unto men, and alone, amongst all, that not only
amend not what is committed to their charge as does a carpenter or a mason, but empaire
and destroy the same, and yet they must full dearely be paied. If the law which Protagoras
proposed to his disciples, were followed, which was, that either they should a pay him
according to his word, or sweare in the temple how much they esteemed the profit they
had received by his discipline, and accordingly satisfy him for his paines, my pedagogues
would be aground, especially if they would stand to the oath of my experience. My vulgar
Perigordian-speech, does very pleasantly terme such self-conceited wizards, letter ferits,

as if they would say letter-strucked men, to whom (as the common saying is) letters have
given a blow with a mallet. Verily for the most part they seem to be distracted even from
common sense. Note but the plaine husbandman, or the unwilie shoemaker, and you see
them simply and naturally plod on their course, speaking only of what they know, and no
further; whereas these letter-puft pedants, because they would faine raise themselves aloft,
and with their litterall doctrine which floteth up and down the superficies of their braine,
arm themselves beyond other men, they uncessantly intricate and entangle themselves:
they utter loftie words, and speak golden sentences, but so that another man does place,
fit, and applie them. They are acquainted with Galen, but know not the disease. They will
stuffe your head with laws, when God wot they have not yet conceived the ground of the
case. They knowe the theorike of all things, but you must seek who shall put it in
practice. I have seen a friend of mine, in my own house, who by way of sport talking
with one of these pedanticall gulls, counterfeited a kind of fustian tongue, and spake a
certain gibrish, without rime or reason, sans head or foot, a hotch-potch of diverse things,
but that he did often enterlace it with inke-pot termes, incident to their disputations, to
ammuse the bookish sot for a whole day long with debating and contending; ever thinking
he answered the objections made unto him; yet was he a man of letters and reputation, a
graduate, and wore a goodly formall long gowne.
Vos o patritius sanguis quos vivere par est
Ooccipiti cæco, posticæ occurrite sannæ Pers. Sat. 1. 61.
You noble blouds, who with a noddle blind
Should live, meet with the mocke that’s made behind.
Whosoever shall narrowly looke into this kind of people, which far and wide has spred
itself, he shall find (as I have done) that for the most part they neither understand
themselves nor others, and that their memory is many times sufficiently full fraught, but
their judgment ever hollow and empty: except their natural inclination have of itself
otherwise fashioned them. As I have seen Adrianus Turnebus who having never
professed any thing but studie and letters, wherein he was, in mine opinion, the worthiest
man that lived these thousand years, and who notwithstanding had no pedanticall thing
about him but the wearing of his gowne, and some externall fashions that could not well
be reduced, and incivilized to the courtiers cut; things of no consequence. And I naturally
hate our people, that will more hardly endure a long robe uncuriously worne, than a crosse
skittish mind: and that observe what leg, or reverence he makes, note his garbe or
demeanor, view his boots or his hat, and marke what manner of man he is. For his inward
parts, I deem him to have been one of the most unspotted and truly honest minds that
ever was. I have sundry times of purpose urged him to speak of matters furthest from his
study, wherein he was so clear-sighted, and could with so quick an apprehension
conceive, and with so sound a judgment distjnguish them, that he seemed never to have
professed or studied other facultie than war and matters of state. Such spirits, such
natures may be termed worthy, goodly, and solid.

----- queis arte benigna
Et meliore luto finxit præcordia Titan. Juven. Sat. xiv. 34.
Whose bowels heavens-bright-Sunne composed
Of better mold, art well disposed.
That maintaine themselves against any bad institution. Now it sufficeth not that our
institution marre us not, it must change us to the better. There are some of our parliaments
and courts, who when they are to admit of any officers , do only examine them of their
learning; others, that by presenting them the judgment of some law cases, endeavor to
sound their understanding. Me thinks the latter keep the better style: And albeit these two
parts are necessarie, and both ought to concur in one, yet truly should that of learning be
less prized than judgement, this may well be without the other, and not the other without
this. For as the Greeke verse says.
Ως ουδεν η αθησις, ην η νους παρη. Gnom. Græc. χ. et φ. ult.
Learning nought worth does lie,
Be not discretion by.
Whereto serveth learning, if understanding be not joined to it? Oh would to God, that for
the good of our justice, the societies of lawyers were as well stored with judgement,
discretion and conscience, as they are with learning and wit. Non vitæ, sed scholæ
discimus: (SEN. Epist. cvi. f.) We learne not for our life, but for the schoole. It is not
enough to join learning and knowledge to the mind, it should be incorporated into it: it
must not be inckled, but dyed with it; and if it change not and better her estate (which is
imperfect) it were much better to leave it. It is a dangerous sword, and which hindreth and
offendeth her master, if it be in a weake hand, and which has not the skill to manage the
same: Vt fuerit melius non didicisse: So as it were better that we had not learned. It is
perhaps the cause that neither we nor divinitie require much learning in women; and
that Francis Duke of Britannie, son to John the fifth, when be was spoken unto for a
marriage betweene him and Isabel a daughter of Scotland; and some told him she was but
meanly brought up and without any instruction of learning, answered, he loved her the
better for it, and that a woman was wise enough if she could but make a difference
betweene the shirt and dublet of her husbands. It is also no such wonder (as some say) that
our auncesters did never make any great accompt of letters, and that even at this day
(except it be by chaunce) they are not often found in our kings and princes chiefest
councels and consultations: And if the end to grow rich by them which now adaies is
altogether proposed unto us by the studie of law, of Phisicke, of Pedantisme, and of
Divinitie, did not keep them in credit, without doubt you should see them as beggarly and
needy, and as much vilified as ever they were. And what hurt I pray you since they neither

teach us to think well nor-do well? Postquam docti prodierunt, boni desunt.(Sen. Epist.
xcv.) Since men became learned, good men failed Each other science is prejudiciall unto
him that has not the science of goodnesse. But may not the reason I whilom sought for,
also proceed thence? That our studie in France, having as it were no other aime but profit,
but those less whom nature has produced to more generous offices, than lucrative,
giving themselves unto learning, or so briefly (before they have apprehended any liking of
them, retired unto a profession that has no communitie with bookes) there are then none
left, altogether to engage themselves to studie and Bookes, but the meaner kind of people,
and such as are borne to base fortune, and who by learning and letters seek some meane to
live and enrich themselves.The minds of which people being both by natural inclination,
by example, and familiar institution, of the basest stampe do falsly reap the fruit of
learning. For it is not in her power to give light unto the mind, that has none, nor to make
a blind man to see. The mysterie of it is not to affoord him sight, but to direct it for him, to
addresse his goings, alwaies provided he have feet of his own, and good, strait, and
capable legs. Knowledge is an excellent drug, but no drug is sufficiently strong to
preserve itself without alteration or corruption, according to the fault of the vessell that
contained it. Some man has a clear sight, that is not right-sighted, and by consequence
seeth what good is, and does not follow it; and seeketh knowledge, but makes no use of it.
The chiefest ordinance of Plato in his Commonwealth is to give unto his Citizens their
charge according to their nature. Nature can do all, and does all. The crookt backt, or
deformed, are unfit for any exercise of the body, and crooked and mis-shapen minds
unproper for exercises of the mind. The bastard and vulgar sort are unworthy of
Philosophie. When we see a man ill shod, if he chance to be a Shoomaker, we say it is no
wonder, for commonly none goes worse shod than they. Even so it seems that experience
does often show us, a Physitian less healthy, a Divine less reformed, and most
commonly a Wiseman less sufficient than another. Aristo Chius had heretofore reason to
say that Philosophers did much hurt their auditors, forasmuch as the greatest number of
minds are not apt to profit by such instructions which, if they take not a good, they will
follow a bad course: ασωτους ex Aristippi, acerbos ex Zenonis Schola exire (Cic. Deor.
iii.). They proceed licentious out of the School of Aristippus, but bitter out of the School
of Zeno. In that excellent institution which Zenophon gives the Persians, we find, that as
other nations teach their children Letters, so they taught theirs virtue. Plato said the eldest
borne son, in their royall succession, was thus taught. "As soone as he was borne, he
was delivered, not to women, but to such Eunuchs as by reason of their virtue were in
chiefest authority about the King. Their speciall charge was first to shapen his limbs and
body, goodly and healthy; and at seven years of age they instructed and inured him to sit
on horsebacke, and to ride a hunting: when he came to the age of fourteene, they delivered
him into the ha nds of foure men, that is to say, the wisest, the justest, the most temperate
and the most valiant of all the nation. The first taught him religion; the second, to be ever
upright and true; the third, to become Master of his own desires; and fourth, to fear
nothing." It is a thing worthy great consideration, that in that excellent, and as I may terme
it, matchlesse policy of Lycurgus, and in truth, by reason of her perfection, monstrous, yet
notwithstanding, so careful for the education of children, as of her principal charge, and

even in the Muses bosome and resting-place, there is so little mention made of learning: as
if that generous youth disdaining all other yokes but of virtue, ought only to be furnished,
in liew of tutors of learning, with masters of valor, of justice, of wisdom, and of
temperance. An example which Plato has imitated in his Lawes. The manner of their
discipline was, to propound questions unto them, teaching the judgement of men and of
their actions: and if by way of reason or discourse they condemned or praised either this
man or that deed, they must be told the truth and best: by which means at once they
sharpened their wits, and learned the right. Astiages in Zenophon calleth Cyrus to an
accompt of his last lesson. It is (says he) that a great lad in our Schools, having a little
coat, gave it to one of his fellowes, that was of lesser stature than himself, and took his
coat from him, which was too big for him: our Master having made me judge of that
difference, I judged that things must be left in the state they were in, and that both seemed
to be better fitted as they were; whereupon he showed me I had done ill; because I had
only considered the comelinesse where I should chiefly have respected justice, which
required that none should be forced in any thing which properly belonged to him, and said
he was whipt for it, as we are in our countrie-townes, when we have forgotten the first
preterperfect tense or Aoriste of greekzzz. My Regent might long enough make me a
prolixe and cunning Oration in genere demonstrativo, in the oratorie kind of praise or
dispraise, before ever he should persuade me his School is worth that. They have gone
about to make the way shorter: and since Sciences (even when they are right taken) can
teach us nothing but wisdom, honestie, integritie, and resolution; they have at first sight
attempted to put their children to the proper of effects, and instruct them, not by hear-say,
but by assay of action, lively modelling and framing them not only by precepts and words,
but principally by examples and works, that it might not be a Science in their mind, but
rather his complexion and habitude; not to purchase, but a natural inheritance.
To this purpose, when Agesilaus was demanded what his opinion was, children should
learne: he answered, What they should do being men. It is no marvell, if such an
institution have produced so admirable effects. Some say, that in other Cities of Greece
they went to seek for Rhetoricians, for Painters, and for Musicians; whereas in
Lacedemon, they sought for Law-givers, for Magistrates, and Generals of armies: In
Athens men learn’d to say well, but here, to do well: there to resolve a sophisticall
argument, and to confound the imposture and amphibologie of words, captiously
enterlaced together; here to shake off the allurements of voluptuousness, and with an
undaunted courage to contemne the threats of fortune, and reject the menaces of death:
those busied and laboured themselves about idle words, these after martiall things: there
the tongue was ever in continuall exercise of speaking, here the mind is an incessant
practice of well-doing. And therefore was it not Strange, if Antipater requiring fiftie of
their children for hostages, they answered cleane contrary to that we would do, that they
would rather deliver him twice so many men; so much did they value and esteeme the
loss of their countries education. When Agesilaus inviteth Xenophon to send his children
to Sparta, there to be brought up; it is not because they should learne Rhetorike or Logike,
but, as himself says, to the end they may learne the worthiest and best science that may
be, to wit the knowledge how to obey and the skill how to commmand. It is a sport to see

Socrates, after his blunt manner, to mocke Hippias, who reporteth unto him what great
summes of money he had gained, especially in certain little Cities and small townes of
Sicily, by keeping schoole, and teaching letters, and that at Sparta he could not get a
shilling. That they were but idiots and foolish people, who can neither measure nor
esteeme nor make no accompt of Grammer, or of Rythmes and who only ammuse
themselves to know the succession of Kings, the establishing and declination of estates,
and such like trash of flim-flam tales. Which done, Socrates forcing him particularly to
allow the excellencie of their form of public government, the happinesse and virtue of
their private life, remits unto him to guesse the conclusion of the unprofitablenesse of his
arts.. Examples teach us both in this martiall policy, and in all such like, that the studie of
sciences donth more weaken and effeminate mens minds than corroborate and adapt them
to war. The mightiest, indeed the best setled estate, that is now in the world, is that of the
Turkes, a nation equally instructed to the esteem e of arms, and disesteeme of letters. I
find Rome to have been most valiant when it was least learned. The most warlike nations
of our days are the rudest and most ignorant. The Scithians, the Parthians and
Tamburlane, serve to verifie my saying. When the Gothes over-ran and ravaged Greece;
that which saved all their Libraries from the fire was, that one among them scattered this
opinion, that such trash of bookes and papers must be untoucht and whole for their
enemies, as the only meane and proper instrument to divert them from all militarie
exercises, and ammuse them to idle, secure, and sedentarie occupations. When our King
Charles the eight, in a manner without unsheathing his sword, saw himself absolute Lord
of the whole Kingdome of Naples, and of a great part of Thuscanie, the Princes and Lords
of his traine ascribed this sodaine and unhoped for victory, and facilitie of so noble and
prodigious a conquest, only to this, that most of the Princes and nobility of Italie
amused themselves rather to become ingenious and wise by learning, than vigorous and
warriers by militarie exercises.



Return to


CHAPTER XXV: OF THE INSTITUTION AND EDUCATION OF CHILDREN; TO THE
LADIE DIANA OF FOIX, COUNTESSE OF GURSON






CHAPTER XXV: OF THE INSTITUTION AND EDUCATION OF CHILDREN; TO THE
LADIE DIANA OF FOIX, COUNTESSE OF GURSON
NEVER knew father, how crooked and deformed soever his son
were, that would either altogether cast him off, or not acknowledge him
for his own: and yet (unlease he be meerely besotted or blinded in his
affection) it may not be said, but he plainly perceiveth his defects, and
has a feeling of his imperfections. But so it is, he is his own. So it is
in myself. I see better than any man else, that what I have set down is
nought but the foolish imaginations of him who in his youth has tasted nothing but the
paring, and seen but superficies of true learning: whereof he has retained but a general
and shapelesse form: a smacke of every thing in general, but nothing to the purpose in
particular: After the French manner. To be short, I know there is an art of Phisicke; a
course of laws; foure parts of the Mathematikes; and I am not altogether ignorant what
they tend unto. And perhaps I also know the scope and drift of Sciences in general to be
for the service of our life. But to wade further, or that ever I tired my self with plodding

upon Aristotle (the Monarch of our modern doctrine) or obstinately continued in search
of any one science: I confesse I never did it. Nor is there any one art whereof I am able so
much as to draw the first lineaments. And there is no scholler (be he of the lowest form)
that may not repute himself wiser than I, who am not able to oppose him in his first
lesson: and if I be forced to it, I am constrained very impertinently to draw in matter from
some general discourse, whereby I examine, and give a guesse at his natural judgement:
a lesson as much unknown to them as theirs is to me. I have not dealt or had commerce
with any excellent book, except Plutarke or Seneca, from whom (as the Danaides) I
draw my water, uncessantly filling, and as fast emptying: some thing whereof I fasten to
this paper, but to my self nothing at all. And touching Bookes: Historie is my chief
studie, Poesie my only delight, to which I am particularly affected: for as Cleanthes said,
that as the voice being forciblie pent in the narrow gullet of a trumpet, at last issueth forth
more strong and shriller , so me seems, that a sentence cunningly and closely couched in
measure-keeping Posie, darts itself forth more furiously, and wounds me even to the
quick. And concerning the natural faculties that are in me (whereof behold here an
essay). I perceive them to faint under their own burden; my conceits, and my judgement
march but uncertaine, and as it were groping, staggering, and stumbling at every rush:
And when I have gone as far as I can, I have no whit pleased my self: for the further I
saile the more land I descrie, and that so dimmed with fogges, and overcast with clouds,
that my sight is so weakned, I cannot distinguish the same. And then undertaking to
speak indifferently of all that presents itself unto my fantasie, and having nothing put
my own natural means to employ therein, if it be my hap (as commonly it is) among
good Authors, to light upon those very places which I have undertaken to treat off, as
even now I did in Plutarke, reading his discourse of the power of imagination, wherein in
regard of those wise men, I acknowledge my self so weake and so poore, so dull and
grose-headed, as I am forced both to pittie and disdaine my self, yet am I pleased with
this; that my opinions have often the grace to jump with theirs, and that I follow them a
loofe-off, and thereby possesse at least, that which all other men have not; which is, that I
know the utmost difference between them and my self: all which notwithstanding, I
suffer my inventions to run abroad, as weake and faint as I have produced them, without
bungling and botching the faults which this comparison has discovered to me in them. A
man had need have a stronge backe, to undertake to march foot to foot with these kind of
men. The indiscreet writers of our age, amidst their triviall compositions, intermingle and
wrest in whole sentences taken from ancient Authors, supposing by such filching-theft to
purchase honor and reputation to themselves, do cleane contrary. For, this infinite
varietie and dissemblance of lustres, makes a face so wan, so ill-favored, and so uglie, in
respect of theirs, that they lose much more than gain thereby. These were two contrary
humors: The Philosopher Chrisippus was wont to foist-in amongst his bookes, not only
whole sentences and other long-long discourses, but whole bookes of other Authors, as in
one, he brought in Euripides his Medea. And Apollodorus was wont to say of him, that if
one should draw from out his bookes what he had stolne from others, his paper would
remaine blanke. Whereas Epicurus cleane contrary to him in three hundred volumes he
left behind him, had not made use of one allegation. It was my fortune not long since to

light upon such a place: I had languishingly traced after some French words, so naked and
hollow, and so void either of sense or matter, that at last I found them to be nought but
meere French words; and after a tedious and wearisome travell, I chanced to stumble upon
an highe riche and even to the clouds-raised piece, the descent whereof had it been
somewhat more pleasant or easy, or the ascent reaching a little further, it had been
excusablee and to be borne with-all; but it was such a steepie down-fall, and by meere
strength hewen out of the main rocke, that by reading of the first six words, me thought I
was carried into another world: whereby I perceive the bottome whence I came to be so
low and deep, as I durst never more adventure to go through i ; for, if I did stuffe any one
of my discourses with those rich spoiles, it would manifestly cause the sottishnesse of
others to appeare. To reprove my own faults in others, seems to me no more
insufferable than to reprehend (as I do often) those of others in my self: They ought to
be accused every where, and have all places of Sanctuarie taken from them; yet do I know
how over boldly, at all times I adventure to equall my self unto my filchings, and so
march hand in hand with them, not without a fond hardie hope, that I may perhaps be able
to bleare the eyes of the Judges from discerning them. But it is as much for the benefit of
my application, as for the good of my invention and force. And I do not furiously front,
and body to body wrestle with those old champions: it is but by flights, advantages, and
false offers I seek to come within them, and if I can, to give them a fall. I do not rashly
take them about the necke, I do but touch them, nor do I go so far as by my bargains I
would seem to do; could I but keep even with them, I should then be an honest man;
for I seek not to venture on them, but where they are strongest. To do as I have seen
some, that is, to shroud themselves under other arms, not daring so much as to show their
fingers ends unarmed and to botch up all their works (as it is an easy matter in a common
subject, namely for the wiser sort) with ancient inventions, here and there hudled up
together. And in those who endeavoured to hide what they have filched from others, and
make it their own, it is first a manifest note of injustice, then a plaine argument of
cowardlinesse; who having nothing of any worth in themselves to make show of, will yet
under the countenance of others sufficiencie go about to make a fair offer: Moreover
(oh great foolishnesse) to seek by such cosening tricks to forestall the ignorant
approbation of the common sort, nothing fearing to discover their ignorance to men of
understanding (whose praise only is of value) who will soon trace out such borrowed
ware. As for me, there is nothing I will do less. I never speak of others, but that I may
the more speak of my self. This concerneth not those mingle-mangles of many kinds of
stuffe, or as the Greeks call them Rapsodies, that for such are published, of which kind I
have (since I came to years of discretion seen diverse most ingenious and wittie; amongst
others, one under the name of Capilupus; besides many of the ancient stampe. These are
wits of such excellence, as both here and elsewhere they will soone be perceived, as our
late famous writer Lipsius, in his learned and laborious work of the Politikes: yet
whatsoever come of it, for so much as they are but follies, my intent is not to smother
them no more than a bald and hoarie picture of mine, where a Painter has drawne not a
perfect visage, but my own. For, however, these are but my humors and opinions,
and I deliver them but to show what my conceit is, and not what ought to be beleeved.

Wherein I ayme at nothing but to display my self, who perhaps (if a new prentiship
change me) shall be another to morrow. I have no authority to purchase beliefe, neither do
I desire it; knowing well that I am not sufficiently taught to instruct others. Some having
read my precedent Chapter, told me not long since in my own house, I should
somewhat more have extended my self in the discourse concerning the institution of
children. Now (Madam) if there were any sufficiencie in me touching that subject, I could
not better employ the same than to bestow it as a present upon that little lad, which ere
long threatneth to make a happie issue from out your honorable woombe: for (Madame)
you are too generous to begin with other than a man child. And having had so great a part
in the conduct of your successeful marriage, I may challenge some right and interest in the
greatness and prosperitie of all that shall proceed from it: moreover, the ancient and
rightful possession, which you from time to time have ever had, and still have over my
service, urgeth me with more than ordinary respects, to wish all honor, wellfare and
advantage to whatsoever may in any sort concerne you and Tours. And truly, my meaning
is but to show that the greatest difficultie, and importing all humane knowledge, seems
to be in this point, where the nurture and institution of young children is in question. For
as in matters of husbandrie, the labor that must be used before sowing, setting; and
planting, indeed in planting itself, is most certain and easy. But when that which was
sowen, set and planted, commeth to take life; before it come to ripenesse, much adoe, and
great varietie of proceeding belongeth to it. So in men, it is no great matter to get them,
but being borne, what continuall cares, what diligent attendance, what doubts and feares,
do daily wait to their parents and tutors, before they can be nurtured and brought to any
good? The fore-show of their inclination while they are young is so uncertaine, their
humors so variable, their promises so changing, their hopes so false, and their
proceedings so doubtful, that it is very hard (indeed for the wisest) to ground any certain
judgment, or assured success upon them. Behold Cymon, view Themistocles, and a
thousand others, how they have differed, and fallen to better from themselves, and deceive
the expectation of such as knew them. The young whelps both of Dogges and Beares at
first sight show their natural dispositions but men headIong embracing this custom or
fashion, following that humor or opinion, admitting this or that passion, allowing of that
or this law, are easily changed, and soone disguised; yet it is hard to force the natural
propension or readinesse of the mind, whereby it followeth, that for want of heedie fore-
sight in those that could not guide their course well, they often employ much time in
vain, to addresse young children in those matters whereunto they are not naturally
addicted. All which difficulties notwithstanding in mine opinion is, to bring them up in the
best and profltablest studies, and that a man should slightly pass over those fond
presages, and deceiving prognostikes, which we over precisely gather in their infancie.
And (without offence be it said) me thinks that Plato in his Commonwealth allowed them
too-too much authority.
Madame, Learning joined with true knowledge is an especiall and gracefull ornament,
and an implement of wonderful use and consequence, namely, in persons raised to that
degree of fortune wherein you are. And in good truth, learning has not her own true
form, nor can she make show of her beauteous lineaments, if she fall into the hands of

base and vile persons. {For, as famous Torquato Tasso says: ’Philosophie being a rich and
noble Queene, and knowing her own worth, graciously smileth upon and lovingly
embraceth Princes and noble men, if they become suiters to her, admitting them as the
minions, and gently affoording them all the favors she can; whereas upon the contrary, if
she be wooed, and sued unto by clownes, mechanicall fellowes, and such base kind of
people, she holds herself disparaged and disgraced, as holding no proportion with them.
And therefore see we by experience, that if a true Gentleman or nobleman follow her with
any attention, and wooed her with importunitie, he shall learne and know more of her, and
prove a better scholler in one yeare, than an ungentle or base fellow shall in seven, though
he pursue her never so attentively.’] She is much more readie and fierce to lend her
furtherance and direction in the conduct of a war, to attempt honorable actions, to
command a people, to treat a peace with a prince of forraine nation, than she is to form
an argument in Logick, to devise a Syllogisme, to canvass a case at the barre or to
prescribe a receit of pills. So (noble Lady) forasmuch as I cannot persuade myself, that
you will either forget or neglect this point, concerning the institution of yours, especially
having tasted the sweetness thereof, and being descended of so noble and learned a race.
For we yet possesse the learned compositions of the ancient and noble Earles of Foix,
from out whose heroicke loynes your husband and you take your ofspring. And Francis
Lord of Candale, your worthie uncle, does daily bring forth such fruits thereof, as the
knowledge of the matchlesse quality of your house shall hereafter extend itself to, many
ages will therefore make you acquainted with one conceit of mine, which contrary to the
common use I hold, and that is all I am able to affoord you concerning that matter. The
charge of the Tutor, which you shall appoint your son, in the choice of whom consisteth
the whole substance of his education and bringing up; on which are many branches
depending, which (forasmuch as I can adde nothing of any moment to it) I will not touch
at all. And for that point, wherein I presume to advise him, he may so far forth give credit
unto it, as he shall see just cause. To a gentleman borne of noble parentage, and heir of a
house that aymeth at true learning, and in it would be disciplined, not so much for gain or
commoditie to himself (because so abject an end is far unworthie the grace and favor of
the Muses, and besides, has a regard or dependencie of others) nor for externall show and
ornament, but to adorn and enrich his inward mind, desiring rather to shape and institute
an able and sufficient man, than a bare learned man; my desire is therefore, that the
parents or overseers of such a gentleman he very circumspect, and careful in chusing his
director, whom I would rather commend for having a well composed and temperate
braine, than a full stuft head, yet both will do well. And I would rather prefer wisdom,
judgement, civill customs, and modest behaviour, than bare and meerly literall learning;
and that in his charge he hold a new course. Some never cease brawling in their schollers
ears (as if they were still pouring in a tonell) to follow their book, yet is their charge
nothing else but to repeat what has been told them before. I would have a tutor to
correct this part, and that at first entrance, according to the capacitie of the wit he has in
hand, he should begin to make show of it, making him to have a smacke of all things, and
how to choose and distinguish them, without helpe of others, sometimes opening him the
way, other times leaving him to open it by himself. I would not have him to invent and

speak alone, but suffer his disciple to speak when his turn commeth. Socrates, and after
him Arcesilaus, made their schollers to speak first and then would speak themselves.
Obest plerumq ue iis qui discere vol unt, auctoritas eorum qui docent (Cic. De Nat. i.).
’Most commonly the authority of them that teach, hinders them that would learne.’
It is therefore meet that he make him first trot-on before him, whereby he may the better
judge of his pace, and so guesse how long he will hold out, that accordingly he may fit his
strength: for want of which proportion we often marre all. And to know how to make a
good choice, and how far forth one may proceed (still keeping a due measure), is one of
the hardest labours I know. It is a signe of a noble, and effect of an undanted spirit, to
know how to second, and how far forth he shall condescend to his childish proceedings,
and how to guide them. As for myself, I can better and with more strength walke up than
down a hill. Those which, according to our common fashion, undertake with one self-
same lesson, and like manner of education, to direct many spirits of diverse formes and
different humors, it is no marvell if among a mulutude of children, they scarce meet with
two or three that reap any good fruit by their discipline, or that come to any perfection. I
would not only have him to demand an accompt of the words contained in his lesson, but
of the sense and substance thereof, and judge of the profit he has made of it, not by the
testimony of his memory, but by the witness of his life. That what he lately learned, he
cause him to set forth and portray the same into sundrie shapes, and then to
accommodate it to as many different and severall subjects, whereby he shal perceive,
whether he have yet apprehended the same, and therein enfeoffed himself, at due times
taking his instruction from the institution given by Plato. It is a signe of cruditie and
indigestion for a man to yield up his meat, even as he swallowed the same: the stomacke
has not wrought his full operation, unless it have changed form, and altered fashion of
that which was given him to boyle and concoct.
[We see men gape after no reputation but learning, and when they say, such a one is a
learned man, they think they have said enough;] Our mind does move at others pleasure,
and tyed and forced to serve the fantasies of others, being brought under by authority, and
forced to stoop to the lure of their bare lesson; we have been so subjected to harpe
upon one string, that we have no way left us to descant upon voluntarie; our vigor and
liberty is cleane extinct. Nunquam tutelæ suæ fiunt: ’They never come to their own
tuition.’ It was my hap to be familiarlie acquainted with an honest man at Pisa, but such
an Aristotelian, as he held this infallible position; that a comformitie to Aristotles doctrine
was the true touchstone and squire of all solid imaginations and perfect veritie; for,
whatsoever had no coherencie with it, was but foolish Chimeræs and idle humors; inasmuch
as he had known all, seen all, and said all. This proposition of his being somewhat over
amply and injuriously interpreted by some, made him a long time after to be troubled in
the inquisition of Rome. I would have him make his scholler narrowly to sift all things
with discretion, and harbour nothing in his head by mere authority or upon trust.
Aristotles principles shall he no more axiomes unto him, than the Stoics or Epicurians.
Let this diversitie of judgements he proposed unto him, if he can, he shall be able to
distinginsh the truth from falsehood, if not, he will remaine doubtful.

Che non men che saper dubbiar m’aggrada. DANTE, Inferno, cant. xii. 48.
No less it pleaseth me,
To doubt, than wise to be.
For if by his own discourse he embrace the opinions of Xenophon or of Plato, they shall
be no longer theirs, but his. He that meerely followeth another, traceth nothing, and
seeketh nothing: Non sumus sub Rege, sibi quisque se vindicet (SEN. Epist. xxxiii). ’We
are not under a Kings command, every one may challenge himself, for let him at least
know that he knows.’ It is requisite he endeavor as much to feed himself with their
conceits as labor to learne their precepts; which, so he know how to applie, let him
hardily forget, where or whence he had them. Truth and reason are common to all, and are
no more proper unto him that spake them heretofore, than unto him that shall speak them
hereafter. And it is no more according to Platoes opinion than to mine, since both he and I
understand and see likewise. The Bees do here and there sticke this and cull that flower, but
afterward they produce the hony, which is peculiarly their own, then is it no more Thyme
or Majoram. So of peeces borrowed of others, he may lawfully alter, transforme, and
confound them, to shape out of them a perfect peece of work, altogether his own;
alwaies provided his judgement, his travell, studie, and institution tend to nothing, but to
frame the same perfect. Let him hardily conceal where or whence he has had any helpe,
and make no show of anything, but of that which he has made himself. Pirates, pilchers,
and borrowers, make a show of their purchases and buildings, but not of that which they
have taken from others: you see not the secret fees or bribes Lawyers take of their Clients,
but you shall manifestly discover the alliances they make, the honors they get for their
children, and the goodly houses they build. No man makes open show of his receits, but
every one of his gettings. The good that comes of studie (or at least should come) is to
prove better, wiser and honester. It is the understanding power (said Epicharmus) that
seeth and heareth, it is it that profiteth all and disposeth all, that moveth, swayeth, and
ruleth all: all things else are but blind, senselesse, and without spirit. And truly in barring
him of liberty to do any thing of himself, we make him thereby more servile and more
coward. Who would ever enquire of his scholler what he thinketh of Rhetorike, of
Grammar of this or of that sentence of Cicero? Which things thoroughly fethered (as if
they were oracles) are let flie into our memory; in which both letters and syllables are
substantiall parts of the subject. To know by roat is no perfect knowledge, but to keep
what one has committed to his memories charge, is commendable: what a man directly
knows, that will he dispose-of, without turning still to his book or looking to his
pattern. A meere bookish sufficiencie is unpleasant. All I expect of it is an imbellishing of
my actions, and not a foundation of them, according to Platoes mind, who says,
constancy, faith, and sinceritie are true Philosophie; as for other Sciences, and tending
elsewhere, they are but garish paintings. I would faine have Paluel or Pompey, these two
excellent dauncers of our time, with all their nimblenesse, teach any man to do their
loftie tricks and high capers, only with seeing them done, and without stirring out of his
place, as some Pedanticall fellowes would instruct our minds without moving or putting it

in practice. And glad would I be to find one that would teach us how to manage a horse, to
tosse a pike, to shoot-off a peece, to play upon the lute, or to warble with the voice,
without any exercise, as these kind of men would teach us to judge, and how to speak
well, without any exercise of speaking or judging. In which kind of life, or as I may terme
it, Prentiship, what action or object soever presents it-self into our eyes, may serve us in
stead of a sufficient book. A prettie pranke of a boy, a knavish tricke of a page, a foolish
part of a lackey, an idle tale or any discourse else, spoken either in jest or earnest, at the
table or in companie, are even as new subjects for us to work upon: for furtherance
whereof commerce or common societie among men, visiting of forraine countries, and
observing of strange fashions, are very necessary, not only to be able (after the manner of
our yong gallants of France) to report how many the Church of Santa Rotonda is in length
or breadth, or what rich garments the curtezan Signora Livia weareth and the worth of her
hosen: or as some do, nicely to dispute how much longer or broader the face of Nero is,
which they have seen in some old ruines of Italie, than that which is made for him in
other old monuments else-where. But they should principally observe , and be able to
make certain relation of the humors and fashions of those countries they have seen,
that they may the better know how to correct and prepare their wits by those of others. I
would therefore have him begin even from his infancie to travell abroad; and first, that at
one shoot he may hit two markes, he should see neighbour-countries, namely where
languages are most different from ours; for, unless a mans tongue be fashioned unto them
in his youth, he shall never attaine to the true pronunciation of them if he once grow in
years. Moreover, we see it received as a common opinion of the wiser sort, that it agrees
not with reason, that a child he alwaies nuzzled, cockered, dandled, and brought up in his
pairents lap or sight; forasmuch as their natural kindness, or (as I may call it) tender
fondnesse, causeth often, even the wisest to prove so idle, so overnice, and so base-
minded. For parents are not capable, neither can they find in their hearts to see them
checkt, corrected, or chastised, nor endure to see them brought up so meanly, and so far
from daintinesse, and many times so dangerously, as they must needs be. And it would
grieve them to see their children come home from those exercises, that a Gentleman must
necessarily acquaint himself with, sometimes all wet and bemyred, other times sweatie
and full of dust, and to drinke being either extreme hot or exceeding cold; and it would
trouble them to see him ride a rough, untamed horse, or with his weapon furiously
incounter a skilful Fencer, or to handle or shoot-off a musket; against which there is no
remedy, if he will make him prove a sufficient, compleat, or honest man: he must not he
spared in his youth; and it will come to pass, that he shall many times have occasion and
be forced to shocke the rules of Physicke.
Vitamque sub dio et trepidis agat In rebus. -- HOR. 1. i. Od. ii. 4.
Leade he his life in open aire.
And in affairs full of despaire.
It is not sufficient to make his mind strong, his muskles must also be strengthened: the

mind is overborne if it be not seconded: and it is too much for her alone to discharge two
offices. I have a feeling how mine panteth, being joined to so tender and sensible a body,
and that lieth so heavy upon it. And in my lecture, I often perceive how my Authors in
their writings sometimes commend examples for magnanimity and force, that rather
proceed from a thicke skin and hardnes of the bones. I have known men, women and
children borne of so hard a constitution, that a blow with a cudgell would less hurt them,
than a filip would doo me, and so dull and blockish, that they will neither stir tongue nor
eyebrowes, beat them never so much. When wrestlers go about to counterfeit the
Philosophers patience, they rather show the vigor of their sinnewes than of their heart. For
the custom to bear travell, is to tolerate grief: Labor callum obducit dolori (Cic. Tusc.
Qu. ii.). ’Labour worketh a hardnesse upon sorrow.’ He must be enured to suffer the
pain and hardnesse of exercises, that so he may be enduced to endure the pain of the
colicke, of cauterie, of fals, of sprains, and other diseases incident to mans body: indeed, if
need require, patiently to bear imprisonment and other tortures, by which sufferance he
shall come to be had in more esteeme and accompt: for according to time and place, the
good as well as the bad man may perhaps fall into them; we have seen it by experience.
Who-soever striveth against the laws, threats good men with mischief and extortion.
Moreover, the authority of the Tutor (who should be sovereign over him) is by the
cockering and presence of the parents, hindred and interrupted: besides the awe and
respect which the houshold bears him, and the knowledge of the meane, possibilities, and
greatness of his house, are in my judgement no small lets in a young Gentleman. In this
schoole of commerce, and societie among men, I have often noted this vice, that in lieu of
taking acquaintance of others, we only endeavor to make ourselves known to them: and
we are more ready to utter such merchandize as we have, than to ingrosse and purchase
new commodities. Silence and modesty are qualities very convenient to civil
conversation. It is also necessary that a young man be rather taught to be discreetly-
sparing and closehanded, than prodigally-wastfull and lavish in his expences, and
moderate in husbanding his wealth when he shall come to possesse it. And not to take
pepper in the nose for every foolish tale that shall be spoken in his presence, because it is
an uncivil importunity to contradict whatsoever is not agreeing to our humor: let him be
pleased to correct himself. And let him not seem to blame that in others which he
refuseth to do himself, nor go about to withstand common fashions. Licet sapere sine
pompa, sine invidia (Sen. Epist. ciii. f.). ’A man may be wise without ostentation, without
envie.’ Let him avoid those imperious images of the world, those uncivil behaviours and
childish ambition wherewith, God wot, too-too many are possest: that is, to make a fair
show of that which is not in him: endeavoring to be reputed other than indeed he is; and as
if reprehension and new devices were hard to come by, he could by that meane acquire
into himself the name of some peculiar virtue. As it pertaineth but to great Poets to use
the liberty of arts; so is it tolerable but in noble minds and great spirits to have a
preheminence above ordinary fashions. Si quid Socrates et Aristippus contra morem et
consuetudinem fecerunt, idem sibi ne abitretur licere; Magis enim illi et divinis honis
hanc licentiam assequebantur (Cic. Off. i.). ’If Socrates and Aristuppus have done ought
against customs or good manner, let not a man think he may do the same: for they

obtained this license by their great and excellent good parts:’ He shall be taught not to
enter rashly into discourse or contesting, but when he shall encounter with a Champion
worthie his strength; And then would I not have him employ all the tricks that may fit his
turn, but only such as may stand him in most stead. That he be taught to be curious in
making choice of his reasons, loving pertinency, and by consequence brevity. That above
all, he be instructed to yield, indeed to quit his weapons unto truth, as soone as he shall
discern the same, whether it proceed from his adversarie, or upon better advice from
himself; for he shall not be preferred to any place of eminencie above others, for
repeating of a prescript part; and he is not engaged to defend any cause, further than he
may approove it; nor shall he be of that trade where the liberty for a man to repent and
re-advise himself is sold for readie money. Neque, ut omnia, que præscripta et imperata
sint, defendat, necessitate ulla cogitur (Cic. Acad. Qu. iv.). ’Nor is he inforced by any
necessitie to defend and make good all that is prescribed and commanded him.’ If his tutor
agree with my humor, he shall frame his affection to be most loyall and true subject to
his Prince, and a most affectionate and couragious Gentleman in al that may concerne the
honor of his Soveraigne or the good of his countrie, and endeavor to suppresse in him all
manner of affection to undertake any action otherwise than for a public good and dutie.
Besides many inconveniences, which greatly prejudice our liberty by reason of these
particular bonds, the judgment of a man that is waged and bought, either it is less free and
honest, or else it is blemisht with oversight and ingratitude. A meere and precise Courtier
can neither have law nor will to speak or think otherwise than favourable of his Master,
who among so many thousands of his subjects has made choice of him alone, to institute
and bring him up with his own hand. These favors, with the commodities that follow
minion Courtiers, corrupt (not without some colour of reason) his liberty, and dazle his
judgement. It is therefore commonly seen that the Courtiers-language differs from other
mens, in the same state, and to be of no great credit in such matters. Let therefore his
conscience and virtue shine in his speech, and reason be his chi efe direction. Let him be
taught to confesse such faults as he shall discover in his own discourses, albeit none
other perceive them but himself; for it is an evident show of judgement, and effect of
sinceritie, which are the chiefest qualities he aymeth at. That wilfully to strive, and
obstinately to contest in words, are common qualities, most apparent in basest mindes:
That to readvise and correct himself, and when one is most earnest, to leave an ill
opinion, are rare, noble, and Philosophicall conditions. Being in companies he shall be put
in mind, to cast his eyes round about, and every where: For I note, that the chief places
are usually seezed upon by the most unworthie and less capable; and that height of
fortune is seldom ioyned with sufficiencie. I have seen that whilst they at the upper end
of a board were busie entertaining themselves with talking of the beautie of the hangings
about a chamber, or of the taste of some good cup of wine, many good discourses at the
lower end have utterly been lost. He shall weigh the carriage of every man in his calling, a
Heardsman, a Mason, a Stranger, or a Traveller; all must be employed; every one
according to his worth; for all helps to make up a houshold; indeed, the folly and the
simplicitie of others shall be as instructions to him. By controlling the graces and manners
of others, he shall acquire unto himself envie of the good and contempt of the bad. Let

him hardly be possest with an honest curiosity to search out the nature and causes of all
things: let him survey whatsoever is rare and singular about him; a building, a fountain, a
man, a place where any battle has been fought, or the passages of Cæsar or
Charlemaine.
Quæ tellus sit lenta gelu, quæ putris ab æstu,
Ventus in Italiam quis bene vela ferat. -- Prop. iv. El. iii. 39.
What land is parcht with heat, what clog’d with frost.
What wind drives kindly to the Italian coast.
He shall endeavor to be familiarly acquainted with the customs, with the means, with
the state, with the dependances and alliances of all Princes; they are things soone and
pleasant to be learned, and most profliable to be known. In this acquaintance of men, my
intending is, that he chiefely comprehend them, that live but by the memory of bookes.
He shall, by the help of Histories, informe himself of the worthiest minds that were in the
best ages. It is a frivolous studie, if a man list, but of unvaluable worth to such as can
make use of it, and as Plato says, the only studie the Lacedemonians reserved for
themselves. What profit shall he not reap, touching this point, reading the lives of our
Plutarke? Alwayes conditioned, the master bethinke himself whereto his charge tendeth,
and that he imprint not so much in his schollers mind the date of the ruine of Carthage, as
the manners of Hanniball and Scipio, nor so much where Marcellus died, as because he
was unworthy of his devoire he died there: that he teach him not somuch to know
Histories as to judge of them. It is amongst things that best agree with my humor, the
subject to which our spirits do most diversly applie themselves. I have read in Titus
Livius a number of things, which perhaps others never read, in whom Plutarke perhaps
read a hundred more than ever I could read, which perhaps the author himself did never
intend to set down. To some kind of men it is a meere gramaticall studie but to others a
perfect anatomie of Philosophy; by means whereof the secretest part of our nature is
searched into. There are in Plutarke many ample discourses most worthy to be known:
for in my judgement, he is the chief work-master of such works, whereof there are a
thousand, whereat he has but slightly glanced; for with his finger he does but point us out
a way to walke in, if we list; and is sometimes pleased to give but a touch at the quickest
and main point of a discourse, from whence they are by diligent studie to be drawne, and
so brought into open market. As that saying of his, That the inhabitants of AsiaNon, gave
perhaps both subject and occasion to my friend Boetie to compose his book of voluntarie
servitude. If it were no more but to see Plutarke wrest a slight action to mans life, or a
word that seems to bear no such sence, it will serve for a whole discourse. It is pittie
men of understanding should so much love brevitie; without doubt their reputation is
thereby better, but we the worse. Plutarke had rather we should commend him for his
judgement than for his knowledge, he loves better to leave a kind of longing-desire in us
of him, than a satietie. He knew very well that even in good things too much may be said:
and that Alexandridas did justly reprove him who spake very good sentences to the

Ephores, but they were over tedious. Oh stranger, quoth he, you speakest what you
oughtest, otherwise then you should. Those that have leane and thin bodies stuffe them
up with bumbasting. And such as have but poore matter, will puff it up with loftie words.
There is a marvelous cleerenesse, or as I may terme it an enlightning of mans judgement
drawne from the commerce of men, and by frequenting abroad in the world; we are all so
contrived and compast in ourselves, that our sight is made shorter by the length of our
nose. When Socrates was demaunded whence he was, he answered, not of Athens, but of
the world; for he, who had his imagination more full and farther stretching, embraced all
the world for his native City, and extended his acquaintance, his societie, and affections
to all man-kind: and not as we do, that looke no further than our feet. If the frost chance to
nip the vines about my village, my Priest does presently argue that the wrath of God hangs
over our head, and threatneth all mankind: and judgeth that the Pippe is alreadie falne
upon the Canibals.
In viewing these intestine and civill broiles of ours, who does not exclaime, that this
worlds vast frame is near unto a dissolution, and that the day of judgement is readie to
fall on us? never remembering that many worse revolutions have been seen, and that
while we are plunged in grief, and overwhelmed in sorrow, a thousand other parts of
the world besides are blessed with happinesse, and wallow in pleasures, and never think
on us? whereas, when I behold our lives, our license, and impunitie, I wonder to see them
so mild and easy. He on whose head it haileth, thinks all the Hemispheare besides to be
in a storme and tempest. And as that dull-pated Savoyard said, that if the seelie King of
France could cunningly have managed his fortune, he might very well have made
himself chief Steward of his Lords household, whose imagination conceived no other
greatness than his Masters; we are all insensible of this kind of error: an error of great
consequence and prejudice. But whosoever shall present into his inward eyes, as it were in
a Table, the Idea of the great image of our universall mother Nature, attired in her richest
robes, sitting in the throne of her Majestie, and in her visage shall read so general and so
constant a varietie; he that therein shall view himself, not himself alone, but a whole
Kingdome, to be in respect of a great circle but the smallest point that can be imagined, he
only can value things according to their essentiall greatness and proportion. This great
universe (which some multiplie as Species under one Genus) is the true looking-glasse
wherein we must looke, if we will know whether we be of a good stamp or in the right
byase. To conclude, I would have this worlds-frame to be my Schollers choise-book: So
many strange humors, sundrie sects, varying judgements, diverse opinions, different
laws, and fantastic customs teaches us to judge rightly of ours, and instruct our
judgement to acknowledge his imperfections and natural weaknesse, which is no easy an
apprentiship: So many innovations of estates, so many fals of Princes, and changes of
public fortune, may and ought to teach us, not to make so great accompt of ours: So
many names, so many victories, and so many conquests buried in darke oblivion, makes
the hope to perpetuate our names but ridiculous, by the surprising of ten Argo-lettiers, or
of a small cottage, which is known but by his fall. The pride and fiercenesse of so many
strange and gorgeous shewes: the pride-puft majestie of so many courts, and of their
greatness, ought to confirme and assure our sight, undauntedly to bear the affronts and

thunder-claps of ours, without feeling our eyes: So many thousande of men, low-laide in
their graves afore us, may encourage us not to fear, or be dismaied to go meet so good
companie in the other world; and so of all things else. Our life (said Pithagoras) draws
neare unto the great and populous assemblies of the Olympike games wherein some, to get
the glory and to win the goale of the games, exercise their bodies with all industrie;
others, for greedinesse of gain, bring thither marchandise to sell: others there are (and
those be not the worst) that seek after no other good, but to marke how why, and to
what end, all things are done: and to be spectators or observers of other mens lives and
actions, that so they may the better judge and direct their own. Unto examples may all
the most profitable Discourses of Philosophie be sorted, which ought to be the touch-stone
of human actions, and a rule to square them by, to whom may be said, served but one
alone, because they could not pronounce one only syllable, which is
-----quid fas optare, asper
Vtile nummus habet, patriæ charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te Deus esse
Jussist, et humana qua parte locatus es in re,
Quid sum us, aut quidnam victuri gignimur. -- Pers. Sat. iii. 69, 67.
What you mayest wish, what profit may come clear,
From new-stampt coyne, to friends and countrie dear
What you ought’st give: whom God would have you be,
And in what part mongst men he placed you.
What we are, and why,
To live heer we were bore.
What it is to know, and not to know (which ought to be the scope of studie), what valor,
what temperance, and what justice is: what difference there is betweene ambition and
avarice, bondage and freedome, subjection and liberty, by which markes a man may
distinguish true and perfect contentment, and how far-forth one ought to fear or
apprehend death, grief, or shame.
Et quo quemque modo fugiatque fertaque laborem. -- Virg. Æn. viii.853.
Now ev’ry labor he may plie.
And bear, or ev’ry labor flie.
What wards or springs move us, and the causes of so many motions in us: For me
seems, that the first discourses wherewith his conceit should be sprinkled, ought to be
those that rule his manners and direct his sense; which will both teach him to know
himself, and how to live and how to die well. Among the liberall Sciences, let us begin
with that which makes us free; Indeed, they may all, in some sort stead us, as an

instruction to our life, and use of it, as all other things else serve the same to some purpose
or other. But let us make especiall choice of that which may directly and pertinently serve
the same. If we could restraine and adapt the appurtenances of our life to their right byase,
and natural limits, we should find the best part of the Sciences that now are in use, cleane
out of fashion with us: indeed, and in those that are most in use, there are certain by-ways
and deep-flows most profitable, which we should do well to leave, and to the institution of
Socrates, limit the course of our studies in those where profit is wanting.
---- sapere aude,
Incipe: vivendi qui recte prorogat horam
Rusticus expectat dum defluayt amnis at ille
Labitur, et labetur in omne volubis ævum. -- Hor. i. Epist. ii. 40.
Be bold to be wise: to begin, be strong
He that to live well does the time prolong,
Clowne-like expects, till down the streame be run,
That runs, and will run, till the world be done.
It is mere simplicitie to teach our children,
Quid moveant Pisces, animosaque siqna Leonis,
Lotus et Hesperia quid Capricornus aqua. -- Prop. iv. El. i. 85.
What Pisces move, or hot breath’d Leos beames.
Or Capricornus bath’d in western streames.
The knowledge of the starres, and the motion of the eighth spheare, before their own;
Τι Πλειαδεσσι καοι
τι δ’ ηστρασι Βοωτεω
What longs it to the seaven stars, and me,
Or those about Bootes be.
Anaximenes writing to Pythagoras, says, ’With what sense can I amuse my self in the
secrets of the Starres, having continually death or bondage before mine eyes!? For at that
time the Kings of Persia were making preparations to war against his Countrie. All men
ought to say so. Being beaten with ambition, with avarice, with rashnesse, and with
superstition, and having, such other enemies unto life within him. Wherefore shall I study
and take care about the mobility and variation of the world? When he is once taught what
is fit to make him better and wiser, he shall be entertained with Logicke, natural
Philosophy. Geometry, and Rhetoricke, then having setled his judgement, looke what
science he does most addict him self unto, he shall in short time attaine to the perfection

of it. His lecture shall be somtimes by way of talk and somtimes by book: his tutor may
now and then supply him with the same Author, as an end and motive of his institution:
sometimes giving him the pith and substance of it ready chewed. And if of himself he be
not so throughly acquainted with bookes, that he may readily find so many notable
discourses as are in them to effect his purpose, it shall not be amisse that some learned
man be appointed to keep him company, who at any time of need may furnish him with
such munit ion as he shall stand in need of; that he may afterward distribute and
dispense them to his best use. And that this kind of lesson be more easy and natural than
that of Gaza, who will make question? Those are but harsh, thornie, and unpleasant
precepts; vain, idle and immaterial words, on which small hold may be taken; wherein is
nothing to quicken the mind. In this the spirit findeth substance to hide and feed upon. A
fruit without all comparison much better, and that will soone be ripe. It is a thing worthy
consideration, to see what state things are brought unto in this our age; and how
Philosophie, even to the wisest, and men of best understanding, is but an idle, vain and
fantastic name, of small use and less worth, both in opinion and effect. I think these
Sophistries are the cause of it, which have forestalled the ways to come unto it: They do
very ill that go about to make it seem as it were inaccessible for children to come unto,
setting it foorth with a wrimpled, gastlie, and frowning visage; who has masked her with
so counterfet, pale, and hideous a countenance? There is nothing more beauteous, nothing
more delightfull, nothing more gainesome; and as I may say, nothing more fondly wanton:
for she presenteth nothing to our eyes, and preacheth nothing to our ears. but sport and
pastime. A sad and lowring-looke plainly declareth that that is not her haunt. Demetrius
the Gramarian, finding a companie of Philosophers sitting close together in the Temple of
Delphos, said unto them, ’Either I am deceived, or by your plausible and pleasant looks,
you are not in any serious and earnest discourse amongst yourselves;’ to whom one of
them, named Heracleon the Megarian, answered, ’That belongeth to them, who busie
themselves in seeking whether the future tense of the verbe βαλλω has a double k, or that
labor to find the derivation of the comparatives, χειρων βελτιων, and of the
superlatives
χειριστον βελτιστον, it is that they must chafe in intertaining themselves with their
science: as for discourses of Philosophie they are wont to glad, rejoice, and not to vex
and molest those that use them.
Deprendas animi tormenta latentis in agro
Corpore, deprendas et gaudia; sumit utrumque
Inde habitum facies. ----- 1 JUVEN. Sat. ix. 18.
You may perceive the torments of the mind.
Hid in sicke body, you the joyes may find;
The face such habit takes in either kind.
That mind which harboureth Philosophie, ought by reason of her sound health, make that

body also sound and healthie: it ought to make her contentment to through-shine in all
exteriour parts: it ought to shapen and modell all outward demeanours to the modell of it:
and by consequence arm him that does possesse it, with a gracious stoutness and lively
audacite, with an active and pleasing gesture, and with a setled and cheereful countenance.
The most evident token and apparant signe of true wisdom is a constant and
unconstrained rejoycing, whose estate is like unto all things above the Moone, that is ever
clear, alwaies bright. It is Baroco and Baralipton, that makes their followers prove so
base and idle, and not Philosophie; they know her not but by hear-say; what? Is it not
she that cleereth all stormes of the mind? And teacheth misery, famine and sicknesse to
laugh? Not by reason of some imaginarie Epicicles, but by natural and palpable reasons.
Shee aymeth at nothing but virtue; it is virtue she seekes after; which as the schoole
says, is not pitcht on the top of an high, steepie, or inaccessible; hill; for they that have
come unto her, affirme that cleane-contrary she keeps her stand, and holds her mansion
in a fair, flourishing, and pleasant plaine, whence as from an high watch tower, she
survaieth all things, to be subject unto her, to whom any man may with great facilitie
come, if he but know the way or entrance to her palace: for, the pathes that lead unto her
are certain fresh and shadie greene allies, sweet and flowrie waies, whose ascent is even,
easy, and nothing wearisome, like unto that of heavens vaults. Forasmuch as they have
not frequented this virtue, who gloriously, as in a throne of Majestie, sits sovereign,
goodly, triumphant, lovely, equally delicious, and couragious, protesting herself to be a
professed and irreconcileable enemy to all sharpnesse, austerite, fear, and compulsion;
having nature for her guide, fortune and voluptuousness for her companions; they
according to their weaknesse have imaginarily feigned her, to have a foolish, sad, grim,
quarelous, spitefull, threatning, and disdainfull visage, with an horride and unpleasant
looke; and have placed her upon a craggie, sharpe, and unfrequented rocke, amidst desert
climes and uncouth crags, as a scar-crow, or bug-bear, to affright the common people
with. Now the tutour, which ought to know that he should rather seek to fill the mind and
store the will of his disciple, as much, or rather more, with love and affection, than with
awe, and reverence unto virtue, may show and tell him, that Poets follow common
humors, making him plainly to perceive and as it were palpably to feel, that the Gods
have rather placed labor and sweat at the entrances which lead to Venus chambers, than
at the doores that direct to Pallas cabinets.
And when he shall perceive his scholler to have a sensible feeling of himself presenting
Bradamant or Angelica before him, as a Mistresse to enjoy, embelished with a natural,
active, generous, and unspotted beautie not uglie or Giant-like, but blithe, livelie, in
respect of a wanton, soft, affected, and artificiall-flaring beautie; the one attired like unto a
young man, coyfed with a bright-shining helmet, the other disguised and drest about the
head like unto an impudent harlot, with embroyderies, frizelings, and carcanets of pearles:
he will ho doubt deem his own love to be a man and no woman, if in his choice he differ
from that effeminate shepheard of Phrygia. In this new kind of lesson be shall declare
unto him, that the prize, the glory, and height of true virtue, consisted in the facilitie,
profit, and pleasure of his exercises: so far from difficultie and incumbrances, that
children as well as men, the simple as soone as the wise, may come unto her Discretion

and temperance, not force or waywardnesse are the instruments to bring him unto her.
Socrates (vertues chief favorite) that he might the better walke in the pleasant, natural,
and open path of her progresses, does voluntarily and in good earnest, quit all compulsion.
Shee is the nurse and foster-mother of all humane pleasures, who in making them just and
upright, she also makes them sure and sincere. By moderating them, she keepeth them in
ure and breath. In limiting and cutting them off, whom she refuseth; she whets us on
toward those she leaveth unto us; and plenteously leaves us them, which Nature pleaseth,
and like a kind mother gives us over unto satietie, if not unto wearisomnesse, unless we
will perhaps say that the rule and bridle, which stayeth the drunkard before
drunkennesse, the glutton before surfetting, and the letcher before the losing of his hair,
be the enemies of our pleasures. If common fortune faile her, it cleerely scaped her; or she
cares not for her, or she frames another unto herself, altogether her own, not so fleeting
nor so rowling. She knows the way how to be rich, mightie and wise, and how to lie in
sweet-perfumed beds. She loves life; she delights in beautie, in glory, and in health. But
her proper and particular office is, first to know how to use such goods temperately, and
how to lose them constantly. An office much more noble than severe, without which all
course of life is unnaturall, turbulent, and deformed, to which one may lawfully join
those rocks, those incumbrances, and those hideous monsters. If so it happen, that his
Disciple prove of so different a condition, that he rather love to give eare to an idle fable
than to the report of some noble voiage, or other notable and wise discourse, when he
shall hear it; that at the sound of a Drum or clang of a Trumpet, which are wont to rowse
and arm the youthly heat of his companions, turneth to another that calleth him to see a
play, tumbling, jugling tricks, or other idle lose-time sports; and who for pleasures sake
does not deem it more delightsome to return all sweatie and wearie from a victorious
combat, from wrestling, or riding of a horse, than from a tennis-court or dancing schoole,
with the prize or honor of such exercises; The best remedy I know for such a one is, to
put him prentice to some base occupation, in some good town or other, indeed, were he the
son of a Duke; according to Platoes rule, who says ’That ohildren must be placed, not
according to their fathers conditions, but the faculties of their mind.’ Since it is
Philosophie that teacheth us to live, and that infancie as well as other ages, may plainly
read her lessons in the same, why should it not be imparted unto young Schollers?
Udum et molle lutum est, nunc nunc propetandus, et acri
Fingendus sine fine rota. -- Pers. Sat. iii.23.
He’s moist and soft mould, and must by and by
Be cast, made up, while wheele whirl’s readily.
We are taught to live when our life is well-nigh spent. Many schollers have been infected
with that loathsome and marrow-wasting disease before ever they came to read Aristotles
treatise of Temperance. Cicero was wont to say, ’That could he out-live the lives of two
men, he should never find leisure to study the ’Lyrike Poets.’ And I find these Sophisters
both worse and more unprofitable. Our child is engaged in greater matters; And but the

first fifteene or sixteene years of his life are due unto Pedantisme, the rest unto action: let
us therefore employ so short time as we have to live in more necessarie instructions. It is
an abuse; remove these thornie quiddities of Logike, whereby our life can no whit be
amended, and betake ourselves to the simple discourses of Philosophy; know how to
chuse and fitly to make use of them: they are much more easy to be conceived than one of
Bocace his tales. A child coming from nurse is more capable of them, than he is to
learne to read or write. Philosophy has discourses, whereof infancie as well as decaying
old-age may make good use. I am of Plutarkes mind, which is, that Aristotle did not so
much ammuse his great Disciple about the arts how to frame Syllogismes, or the
principles of Geometric, as he endevoured to instruct him with good precepts concerning
valor, prowess, magnanimity, and temperance, and an undanted assurance not to fear
any thing; and with such munition he sent him, being yet very young, to subdue the
Empire of the world, only with 30000. footmen, 4000. horsemen, and 42000. Crownes in
monie. As for other arts amd sciences; he says Alexander honoured them, and
commended their excellencie and comlinesse; but for any pleasure he took in them, his
affection could not easily be drawne to exercise them.
----- petite hinc juvenesque senesque
Finem animo certum, miserisque viatica canis.-- Sat. v. 64.
Young men and old, draw hence (in your affairs)
Your minds set marke, provision for gray haires.
It is that which Epicurus said in the beginning of his letter to Meniceus: ’Neither let the
youngest shun nor the oldest wearie himself in philosophying for who does otherwise
seems to say, that either season to live happily is not yet come, or is already past.’ Yet
would I not have this young gentleman pent-up, nor carelesly cast-off to the heedlesse
choler or melancholy humor of the hasty School-master. I would not have his budding
spirit corrupted with keeping him fast-tied, and as it were labounng fourteene or fifteene
hours a day poaring on his book, as some do, as if he were a day-labouring man;
neither do I think it fit, if at any time, by reason of some solitairie or melancholy
complexion, he should be seen with an over-indiscreet application given to his book, it
should be cherished in him; for, that does often make him both unapt for civill
conversation and distracts him from better employments: How many have I seen in my
days, by an over-greedy desire of knowledge, become as as it were foolish? Carneades
was so deeply plunged, and as I may say besotted in it, that he could never have leisure to
cut his hair, or pare his nailes: nor would I have his noble manners obscured by the
incivilitie and barbarisms of others. The French wisdom has long since proverbially
been spoken of as very apt to conceive study in her youth, but most unapt to keep it
long. In good truth, we see at this day that there is nothing lovelier to behold than the
young children of France; but for the most part, they deceive the hope which was fore-
apprehended of them: for when they once become men, there is no excellencie at all in
them. I have heard men of understanding hold this opinion, that the Colleges to which

they are sent (of which there are store) do thus besot them: whereas to our schollers a
cabinet, a gardin, the table, the bed, a solitarinesse, a companie, morning and evening, and
all hours shall be likewise unto him, all places shall be a study for him: for Philosophy (as a
former of judgemente, and modeler of customs) shall be his principal lesson, having the
privilege to entermeddle herself with all things, and in all places. Isocrates the Orator,
being once requested in a great banket to speak of his art, when all thought he had reason
to answer, said, ’It is not now time to do what I can, and what should now be done, I
cannot do it;’ For, to present orations, or to enter into disputation of Rhetorike, before a
companie assembled together to be merrie, and make good cheere, would be but a medley
of harsh and jarring music. The like may be said of all others Sciences. But touching
Philosophy, namely, in that point where it treateth of man, and of his duties and offices, it
has been the common judgement of the wisest, that in regard of the pleasantnesse of her
conversations, she ought not to be rejected, neither at banquets nor at sports. And Plato
having invited her to his solemn feast, we see how kindly she entertaineth the companie
with a mild behaviour, fitly stuting herself to time and place, notwithstanding it be one
of his learned’st and profitable discourses.
Æque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus æque,
Et neglecta æque pueris senibusque nocebit. ----- HOR. i. Epist. i. 25.
Poore men likewise, likewise rich men it easeth.
Alike it, scorned, old and young displeaseth.
So doubtlesse he shall less be idle than others; for even as the paces we bestow walking
in a gallerie, althouch they be twice as many more, wearie us not so much as those we
spend in going a set journey: So our lesson being past over, as it were, by chance, or way
of encounter, without strict observance of time or place, being applied to all our actions,
shall be digested, and never felt. All sports and exercises shall be a part of his study;
running, wrestling, music, dancing, hunting, and managing of arms and horses. I
would have the exterior demeanor or decencie, and the disposition of his person to be
fashioned together with his mind: for, it is not a mind, it is not a body that we erect, but it
is a man, and we must not make two parts of him. And as Plato says, They must not be
erected one without another, but equally be directed, no otherwise than a couple of horses
matched to draw in one self-same teeme. And to hear him, does he not seem to employ
more time and care in the exercises of his body: and to think that the mind is together
with the same exercised, and not the contrary? As for other matters, this institution ought
to be directed by a sweet-severe mildness; Not as some do, who in liew of gently-bidding
children to the banquet of letters, present them with nothing but horror and crueltie. Let
me have this violence and compulsion removed, there is nothing that in my seeming, does
more bastardise and dizzie a well-borne and gentle nature: If you would have him stand in
awe of shame and punishment, do not so much enure him to it: accustome him patiently
to endure sweat and cold, the sharpnesse of the wind, the heat of the sunne, and how to
despise all hazards. Remove from him all nicenesse and quaintness in clothing, in lying ,

in eating, and in drinking: fashion him to all things, that he prove not a fair and wanton-
puling boy, but a lustie and vigorous boy: When I was a child, being a man, and now am
old, I have ever judged and believed the same. But amongst other things, I could never
away with this kind of discipline used in most of our Colleges. It had perhaps been
less hurtful, if they had somewhat inclined to mildness, or gentle intreatie. It is a very
prison of captivated youth, and proves dissolute in punishing it before it be so. Come upon
them when they are going to their lesson, and you hear nothing but whipping and
brawling, both of children tormented, and masters besotted with anger and chafing. How
wide are they, which go about to allure a child’s mind to go to its book, being yet but
tender and fearefull, with a stearne-frowning countenance, and with hands full of rods? Oh
wicked and pernicious manner of teaching! which Quintillian has very well noted, that
this imperious kind of authority, namely, this way of punishing of children, draws many
dangerous inconveniences within. How much more decent were it to see their school-
houses and formes strewed with green boughs and flowers, than with bloudy
burchentwigs? If it lay in me, I would do as the Philosopher Speusippus did, who caused
the pictures of Gladness and Joy, of FloraPlato sheweth him self in framing of his laws
about the recreation and pastime of the youth of his City, and how far he extends him
self about their exercises, sports, songs, leaping, and dancing, whereof he says, that
severe antiquitie gave the conduct and patronage unto the Gods themselves, namely, to
Apollo, to the Muses, and to Minerva. Marke but how far-forth he endevoreth to give a
thousand precepts to be kept in his places of exercises both of body and mind. As for
learned Sciences, he stands not much upon them, and seems in particular to commend
Poesie, but for Musickes sake. All strangenesse and self-particularitie in our manners and
conditions, is to be shunned, as an enemy to societie and civill conversation. Who would
not be astonished at Demophons complexion, chief steward of Alexanders household,
who was wont to sweat in the shadow, and quiver for cold in the sunne? I have seen
some to startle at the smell of an apple more than at the shot of a peece; some to be
frighted with a mouse, some readie to cast their gorge at the sight of a messe of creame,
and others to be scared with seeing a fether bed shaken: as Germanicus, who could abide
to see a cock, or hear his crowing. There may perhaps be some hidden propertie of nature,
which in my judgement might easilie be removed, if it were taken in time. Institution has
gotten this upon me (I must confesse with much adoe) for, except here, all things else
that are mans food agree indifferently with my taste. The body being yet souple, ought to
be accommodated to all fashions and customs; and (alwaies provided, his appetites and
desires be kept under) let a yong man boldly be made fit for al Nations and companies;
indeed, if need be, for al disorders and surfetings; let him acquaint himself with al fashions;
That he may be able to do al things, and love to do none but those that are commendable.
Some strict Philosophers commend not, but rather blame Calisthenes, for losing the good
favor of his Master Alexander, only because he would not pledge him as much as he had
drunke to him. He shall laugh, jest, dally, and debauch himself with his Prince. And in
his debauching, I would have him out-go al his fellowes in vigor or and constancy, and
that he omit not to do evil neither for want of strength or knowledge, but for lacke of
will. Multum interest utrum peccare quis nolit, aut nesciat. ’There is a great difference,

whether one have no will, or no wit to go amisse.’ I thought to have honoured a
gentleman (as great a stranger, and as far from such riotous disorders as any is in France)
by enquiring of him in very good companie, how many times in all his life he had bin
drunke in Germany, during the time of his abode there, about the necessarie affairs of
our King; who took it even as I meant it, and answered three times, telling the time and
manner how. I know some, who for want of that quality, have been much perplexed when
they have had occasion to converse with that nation. I have often noted with great
admiration, that wonderful nature of Alcibiades, to see how easilie he could sute himself
to so diverse fashions and different humors, without prejudice unto his health; sometimes
exceeding the sumptuousnesse and pompe of the Persians, and now and then surpassing
the austeritie and frugality of the Lacedemonians; as reformed in Sparta, as voluptuous in
Ionia. and of the Graces, to be set up roundabout his school-house. Where their profit
lieth, there should also be their recreation. Those meats ought to be sugred over, that are
healthful for childrens stomakes, and those made bitter that are hurtful for them. It is
strange to see how careful
Omnis Aristippum decuit color, et status, et res. -- Hor. Epist. xvii. 23.
All colours, states, and things are fit
For courtly Aristippus wit.
Such a one would I frame my Disciple,
----- quem duplici panno patientia velat,
Mirabor, vitæ via si conversa decebit. --25.
Whom patience clothes with sutes of double kind,
I muse, if he another way will find.
Personamque feret non inconcinnus utramque. -- 29.
He not unfitly may
Both parts and persons play.
See here my lessons, wherein he that acteth them, profiteth more than he that but
knows them, whom if you see, you hear, and if you hear him, you see him. God
forbid, says some body in Plato, that to Philosophize, be to learne many things, and to
exercise the arts. Hanc amplissimam omnium artium bene vivendi disciplinam, vita magis
quam litteris persequenti sunt. (Cic. Tusc. Qu. ’This discipline of living well, which is the
amplest of all other arts, they followed rather in their lives than in their learning or
writing.’ Leo Prince of the Phliasians, enquiring of Heraclides Ponticus what art he
professed, he answered, ’Sir, I professe neither art nor science; but I am a Philosopher.’

Some reproved Diogenes, that being an ignorant man, he did nevertheless nmeddle with
Philosophie, to whom he replied, ’So much the more reason have I and to greater purpose
do I meddle with it.’ Hegesias praid him upon a time to read some book unto him: ’You
are a merry man,’ said he; ’As you chuse natural and not painted right and not counterfeit
figges to eat, why do you not likewise chuse, not the paint ed and written, but the true
and natural exercises?’ He shall not so much repeat, as act his lesson. In his actions shall
he make repetition of the same. We must observe, whether there be wisdom in his
enterprises, integritie in his demeanor, modesty in his jestures, justice in his actions,
judgement and grace in his speech, courage in his sicknesse, moderation in his sports,
temperance in his pleasures, order in the government of his house, and indifference in his
taste, whether it be flesh, fish, wine, or water, or whatsoever he feedeth upon. Qui
disciplinam suam non ostentationem scientiæ sed legem vitæ putet: quique obtemperet
ipse sibi et decretis pareat (Cic. ibid. ii.). ’Who thinks his learning not an ostentation of
knowledge, but a law of life, and himself obayes himself and does what is decreed.’ The
true mirror of our discourses is the course of our lives. Zeuxidamus answered one that
demanded of him, why the Lacedemonians did not draw into a book, the ordinances of
prowess, th t so their yong men might read them; ’it is,’ says he, ’because they would
rather accustome them to deeds and actions, than to bookes and writings.’ Compare at the
end of fifteene or sixteens years one of those collegiall Latinizers, who has employed all
that while only in learning how to speak, to such a one as I meane. The world is nothing
but babling and words, and I never saw man that does not rather speak more than he
ought, than less. Notwithstanding halfe our age is consumed that way. We are kept foure
or five years learning to understand bare words, and to joine them into clauses, then as
long in proportioning a great body extended into foure or five parts; and five more at least
ere we can succinctly know how to mingle, joine, and interlace them handsomly into a
subtil fashion, and into one coherent orbe. Let us leave it to those whose profession is to
do nothing else. Being once on my journey to Orleans, it was my chance to meet upon
that plaine that lieth on this side Clery, with two Masters of Arts, traveling toward
Bordeaux, about fiftie paces one from another; far off behind them, I descride a troupe of
horsemen, their Master riding formost, who was the Earle of Rochefocault; one of my
servants enquiring of the first of those Masters of Arts, what Gentleman he was that
followed him; suposing my servant had meant his fellow-scholler, for he had not yet seen
the Earles traine, answered pleasantly, ’He is no gentleman. Sir, but a Gramarian, and I
am a Logitian.’ Now, we that contrariwise seek not to frame a Gramiarian, nor a Logitian,
but a compleat gentleman, let us give them leave to mispend their time; we have else-
where, and somewhat else of more import to do. So that our Disciple be well and
sufficiently stored with matter; words will follow and if they will not follow gently, he
shall hale on perforce. I hear some excuse themselves, that they cannot express th eir
meaning, and make a semblance that their heads are so full stuft with many goodly things,
but for want of eloquence they can neither utter nor make show of them. It is a meere
fopperie. And will you know what, in my seeming, the cause is? They are shadows and
Chimeræs, proceeding of some formelesse conceptions, which they cannot distinguish or
resolve within, and by conseguence are not able to produce them inasmuch as they

understand not themselves: And if you but marke their earnestnesse, and how they
stammer and labor at the point of their deliverie, you would deem that what they go
withall, is but a conceiving, and therefore nothing near down-lying; and that they do
but licke that imperfect and shapelesse lump of matter, As for me, I am of opinion, and
Socrates would have it so, that he who had a clear and lively imagination in his mind,
may easilie produce and utter the same, although it be in Bergamask or Welsh, and if he be
dumbe, by signes and tokens. iv.).
Verbaque prævisam rem non invita sequentur. --Hor. Ars. Poet. 311.
When matter we fore-know,
Words voluntarie flow.
As one said, as poetically in his prose, Cum res animum occupavere, verba ambiunt;
(Sen. Controv. vii. Proæ). ’When matter has possest their minds, they hunt after words:’
and another: Ipsee res verba rapiunt. ’Things themselves will catch and carry words:’ He
knowes neither Ablative, Conjunctive, Substantive, nor Gramar, no more does his
Lackeye nor any Oyster-wife about the streets, and yet if you have a mind to it he will
intertaine you, your fill, and perhaps stumble as little and as seldom against the
rules of his tongue, as the best Master of arts in France. He has no skill in Rhetoricke,
nor can he with a preface fore-stall and captivate the Gentle Readers good will: nor careth
he greatly to know it. In good sooth, all this garish painting is easilie defaced, by the lustre
of an in-bred and simple truth; for these dainties and quaint devices serve but to ammuse
the vulgar sort; unapt and incapable to taste the most solid and firme meat: as Afer very
plainly declareth in Cornelius Tacitus. The Ambassadours of SamosCleomenes King of
Sparta, prepared with a long prolix Oration, to stir him up to war against the tyrant
Policrates, after he had listned a good while unto them, his answer was: ’Touching your
Exordium or beginning I have forgotten it; the middle I remember not; and for your
conclusion I will do nothing in it.’ A fit, and (to my thinking) a very good answer; and the
Orators were put to such a shift, as they knew not what to replie. And what said another?
the Athenians from out two of their cunning Architects, were to chuse one to erect a
notable great frame; the one of them more affected and self presuming, presented
himself before them with a smooth fore-premeditated discourse, about the subject of that
piece of work, and thereby drew the judgements of the common people unto his liking;
but the other in few words spake thus: ’Lords of Athens, what this man has said I will
performe.’ In the greatest earnestnesse of Ciceroes eloquence many were drawn into a
kind of admiration; But Cato jesting at it, said, ’Have we not a pleasant Consull?’ A
quick cunning Argument, and a wittie saying, whether it go before or come after, it is
never out of season. If it have no coherence with that which gooth before, nor with what
commeth after; it is good and commendable in itself. I am none of those that think a
good Ryme, to make a good Poeme; let him hardly (if so he please) make a short syllable
long, it is no great matter: if the inventition be rare and good, and his wit and judgement
have cunningly played their part. I will say to such a one; he is a good Poet, but an ill

Versifier. being come to
Emunctæ naris durus componere versus. Hor. i. Sat. iv. 8. Lucil.
A man whose sense could finely pierce.
But harsh and hard to make a verse.
Let a man (says Horace) make his work loose all seames, measures, and joints.
Tempora certa modosque et quod prius ordine verbum est,
Posterius facias, præponens ultima primis:
Invenias etiam disjecti membra Poetæ. -- 58, 62.
Set times and moods, make you the first word last
The last word first, as if they were new cast:
Yet find the unjoynted Poets joints stand fast.
He shall for all that, nothing gain-say himself, every piece will make a good show. To
this purpose answered Menander those that chid him, the day being at hand, in which he
had promised a Comedy, and had not begun the same, ’Tut-tut,’ said he, It is alreadie
finished, there wanteth nothing but to adde the verse unto it;’ for, having ranged and cast
the plot in his mind, he made small accompt of feet, of measures, or cadences of verses,
which indeed are but of small import in regard of the rest. Since great Ronzarde and
learned Bellay have raised our French Poesie unto that height of honor where it now is: I
see not one of these petty ballad-makers, or prentise dogrell rymers, that does not bombast
his labours with high-swelling and heaven-disimbowelling words, and that does not
marshall his cadences very near as they do. Plus sonat quam valet (Sen. Epist. xl.). ’The
sound is more than the weight or worth.’ And for the vulgar sort, there were never so
many Poets, and so few good: but as it has been easy for them to represent their rymes,
so come they far short in imitating the rich descriptions of the one, and rare inventions of
the other. But what shall he do, if he be urged with sophisticall subtilties about a
Sillogisme? A gammon of Bacon makes a man drink, drinking quencheth a mans thirst;
Ergo, a gammon of bacon quencheth a mans thirst. Let him mock at it, it is more wittie to
be mockt at than to be answered. Let him borrow this pleasant counter-craft of Aristippus:
’Why shall I unbind that, which being bound does so much trouble me?’ Someone
proposed certain Logicall quiddities against Cleanthes, to whom Chrisippus said; use
such jugling tricks to play with children, and divert not the serious thoughts of an aged
man to such idle matters. If such foolish wiles, Contorta et aculeata sophismata (Cic.
Acad. Qu. iv.). ’Intricate and stinged sophismes,’ must persuade a lie, it is dangerous: but
if they proove void of any effect, and move him but to laughter, I see not why he shall
beware of them. Some there are so foolish that will go a quarter of a mile out of the way to
hunt after a quaint new word, if they once get in chace; Aut qui non verba rebus aptant,

sed res extstrinsecus arcessunt, quibus verba conveniant: ’Or such as fit not words to
matter, but fetch matter from abroad, whereto words be fitted.’ And another, Qui
ancicujus verbi decore placentis vocentur ad id quod non proposuerant scribere (Sen.
Epist. lix.). ’Who are allured by the grace of some pleasing word, to write what they
intended not to write.’ I do more willingly winde up a wittie notable sentence, that so I
may sew it upon me, than unwinde my thread to go fetch it. Contrariwise, it is for words
to serve and wait upon the matter, and not for matter to attend upon words, and if the
French tongue cannot reach unto it, let the Gaskonie, or any other. I would have the
matters to surmount, and so fill the imagination of him that harkeneth, that he have no
remembrance at all of the words. It is a natural, simple, and unaffected speech that I love,
so written as it is spoken, and such upon the paper, as it is in the mouth, a pithie, sinnowie,
full, strong, compendious and materiall speech, not so delicate and affected as vehement
and piercing.
Hæc demum sapiet dictio, quæ feriet.-- Epitaph. Lucan. 6.
In fine, that word is wisely fit,
Which strikes the fence, the marke does hit.
Rather difficult than tedious, void of affection, free, loose and bold, that every member
of it seem to make a body; not Pedanticall, nor Frier-like, nor Lawyer-like, but rather
down right, Souldier-like. As Suetonius calleth that of Julius Cæsar, which I see no
reason why he calleth it. I have sometimes pleased myself in imitating that
licenciousnesse or wanton humor of our youths, in wearing of their garments; as
carelessly to let their cloaks hang down over one shoulder; to weare their cloakes scarfe
or bawdrikewise, and their stockings loose hanging about their legs. It represents a kind of
disdainful fiercenesse of these forraine embellishings, and neglect carelesnesse of art: But
I commend it more being employed in the course and form of speech. All manner of
affectation, namely in the livelinesse and liberty of France, is unseemely in a Courtier.
And in a Monarchie every Gentleman ought to addresse himself unto a Courtiers
carriage. Therefore do we well somewhat to incline to a native and carelesse behaviour. I
like not a contexture, where the seames and pieces may be seen: As in a well compact
body, what need a man distinguish and number all the bones and veines severally? Quæ
veritati operam dat oratio, incomposita sit et simplex.1 Quis accuratete loquitur nisi qui
vult putide loqui (Se. Epist. xl. m. lxxv. p.). ’The speach that intendeth truth must be
plaine and unpollisht: Who speaks elaborately, but he that means to speak
unsavouredly?’ That eloquence offereth injurie unto things, which altogether draws us to
observe it. As in apparell, it as a signe of pusillanimitie for one to marke himself, in some
particular and unusuall fashion: so likewise in common speech, for one to hunt after new
phrases, and unaccustomed quaint words, proceedeth of a scholasticall and childish
ambition. Let me use none other than are spoken in the hals of Paris. Aristophanes the
Gramarian was somewhat out of the way, when he reproved Epicurus, for the simplicitie
of his words, and the end of his art oratorie, which was only perspicuitie in speeche. The

imitation of speech, by reason of the facilitie of it, followeth presently a whole nation. The
imitation of judging and inventing, comes more slow. The greater number of Readers,
because they have found one self-same kind of gowne, suppose most falsely to holde one
like body. Outward garments and clokes may be borrowed, but never the sinews and
strength of the body. Most of those that converse with me, speak like unto these Essayes;
but I know not whether they think likewise. The Athenians (as Plato averreth) have for their
part great care to be fluent and eloquent in their speech; The Lacedemonians endeavor to
be short and compendious; and those of Creet labor more to be plentifull in conceits
than in language. And these are the best. Zeno was wont to say, ’That he had two sorts of
disciples; the one he called φιλολογους, curious to learne things, and those were his
darlings, the other he termed λογοφιλους, who respected nothing more than the language.
Yet can no man say, but that to speak well, is most gracious and commendable, but not
so excellent as some make it: and I am grieved to see how we employ most part of our
time about that only. I would frst know my own tongue perfectly, then my neighbors
with whom I have most commerce. I must needs acknowledge, that the Greeke and Latine
tongues are great ornaments in a gentleman, but they are pnrchased at over-high a rate.
Use it who list, I will tell you how they may be gotten better, cheaper, and much sooner
than is ordinarily used, which was tried in myself. My late father, having, by all the
means and industrie that is possible for a man, sought amongst the wisest, and men of
best understanding, to find a most exquisite and readie way of teaching, being advised of
the inconveniences then in use; was given to understand that the lingring while, and best
part of our youth, that we employ in learning the tongues, which cost them nothing, is the
only cause we can never attaine to that absolute perfection of skill and knowledge of the
Greekes and Romanes. I do not believe that to be the only cause. But so it is, the
expedient my father found out was this; that being yet at nurse, and before the first loosing
of my tongue, I was delivered to a Germane (who died since, a most excellent Physitian in
France) he being then altogether ignorant of the French tongue, but exquisitely readie and
skilfull in the Latine. This man, whom my father had sent for of purpose, and to whom he
gave very great entertainment, had me continually in his arms, and was mine only
overseer. There were also joined unto him two of his countrymen, but not so learned;
whose charge was to attend, and now and then to play with me; and all these together did
never entertaine me with other than the Latine tongue. As for others of his household, it
was an inviolable rule, that neither himself, nor my mother, nor man, nor maid-servant,
were suffered to speak one word in my companie, except such Latine words as every one
had learned to chat and prattle with me. It were strange to tell how every one in the house
profited therein. My Father and my Mother learned so much Latine, that for a need they
could understand it, when they heard it spoken, even so did all the household servants,
namely such as were neerest and most about me. To be short, we were all so Latinized,
that the townes round about us had their share of it; insomuch as even at this day, many
Latine names both of workmen and of their tooles are yet in use amongst them. And as for
myself, I was about six years old, and could understand no more French or Perigordine
than Arabike; and that without art, without bookes, rules, or grammar, without whipping
or whining, I had gotten as pure a Latin tongue as my Master could speak; the rather

because I could neither mingle or confound the same with other tongues. If for an Essay
they would give me a Theme, whereas the fashion in CoIleges is, to give it in French, I
had it in bad Latine, to reduce the same into good. And Nicholas Grucci, who has written
De comitiis Romanorum, William Guerenti, who has commented Aristotele: George
Buchanan, that famous Scottish Poet, and Marke-Antonie Muret, whom (while he lived)
both FranceItalie to this day, acknowledge to have been the best orator: all which have
been my familiar tutors, have often told me, that in mine infancie I had the Latine tongue
so readie and so perfect, that themselves feared to take me in hand. And Buchanan, who
afterward I saw attending on the Marshall of Brissacke, told me, he was about to write a
treatise of the institution of children, and that he took the model and patterne from mine:
for at that time he had the charge and bringing up of the young Earle of Brissack, whom
since we have seen prove so worthy and so valiant a Captain. As for the Greeke,
wherein I have but small understanding, my father purposed to make me learne it by art;
But by new and uncustomed means, that is, by way of recreation and exercise. We did
tosse our declinations and conjugations to and fro, as they do, who by way of a certain
game at tables learne both Arithmetic and Geometrie. For, amongst other things he had
especially been persuaded to make me taste and apprehend the fruits of dutie and science
by an unforced kind of will, and of my own choice; and without any compulsion or
rigor to bring me up in all mildness and liberty: indeed with such kind of superstition, that,
whereas some are of opinion that suddenly to awaken young children, and as it were by
violence to startle and fright them out of their dead sleepe in a morning (wherein they are
more heavy and deeper plunged than we) does greatly trouble and distemper their braines,
he would every morning cause me to be awakened by the sound of some instrument; and I
was never without a servant who to that purpose attended upon me. This example may
serve to judge of the rest; as also to commend the judgement and tender affection of so
careful and loving a father: who is not to be blamed, though he reaped not the fruits
answerable to his exquisite toyle and painefull manuring. Two things hindered the same;
first the barrennesse and unfit soyle: for howbeit I were of a sound and strong constitution,
and of a tractable and yielding condition, yet was I so heavy, so sluggish, and so dull, that
I could not be rouzed (indeed were it to go to play) from out mine idle drowzinesse. What I
saw, I saw it perfectly; and under this heavy, and as it were Lethe-complexion did I breed
hardie imaginations, and opinions far above my years. My spirit was very slow, and
would go no further, than it was fed by others; my apprehension blockish, my invention
poore; and besides, I had a marvelous defect in my weake memory; it is therefore no
wonder, if my father could never bring me to any perfection. Secondly, as those that in
some dangerous sicknesse, moved with a kind of hope-full and greedie desire of perfect
health again, give eare to every Leach of Emperike, and follow all counsels, the good
man being exceedingly fearefull to commit any oversight, in a matter he took so to heart,
suffered himself at last to be led away by the common opinion, which like unto the
Cranes, followeth over those that go before, and yielded to custom: having those no
longer about him, that had given him his first directions, and which they had brought out
of Italie. Being but six years old I was sent to the College of Guyenne, then most
flourishing and reputed the best in France, where it is impossible to adde any thing to the

great care he had, both to chuse the best and most sufficient masters that could be found,
to read unto me, as also for all other circumstances partaining to my education; wherein
contrary to usual customs of Colleges, he observed many particular rules. But so it is, it
was ever a College. My Latin tongue was forthwith corrupted, whereof by reason of
discontinuance, I afterward lost all manner of use: which new kind of institution stood me
in no other stead, but that at my first admittance it made me to over-skip some of the
lower formes, and to be placed in the highest. For at thirteene years of age that I left the
College, I had read over the whole course of Philosophie (as they call it) but with so small
profit, that I can now make no account of it. The first taste or feeling I had of bookes, was
of the pleasure I took in reading the fables of Ovids Metamorphosies; for, being but
seven or eight years old, I would steale and sequester my self from all other delights,
only to read them: Forasmuch as the tongue wherein they were written was to me
natural; and it was the easiest book I knew, and by reason of the matter therein contained
most agreeing with my young age. For of King Arthur, of Lancelot du Lake, of Amadis, of
Huon of Burdeaux, and such idle time consuming and wit-besotting trash of bookes
wherein youth does commonly ammuse itself, I was not so much as acquainted with
their names, and to this day know not their bodies, nor what they containe: So exact was
my discipline. Whereby I became more carelesse to studie my other prescript lessons. And
well did it fall out fall out for my purpose, that I had to deale with a very discreet master,
who out of his judgement could with such dexterite winke at and second my
untowardlinesse, and such other faults that were in me. For by that means I read over
Virgils Æneados, Terence, Plautus, and other Italian Comedies, allured thereunto by the
pleasantnesse of their severall subjects: Had he been so foolishly-severe, or so severely
froward as to crosse this course of mine, I think verily I had never brought any thing
from the College, but the hate and contempt of Bookes, as does the greatest part of our
Nobilitie. Such was his discretion, and so warily did he behave himself, that he saw and
would not see: he would foster and increase my longing: suffering me but by stealth and
by snatches to glut my self with those Bookes, holding ever a gentle hand over me,
concerning other regular studies. For, the chiefest thing my father required at their hands
(unto whose charge he had committed me) was a kind of well conditioned mildness and
facilitie of complexion. And, to say truth, mine had no other fault, but a certain dull
languishing and heavy slothfullnesse. The danger was not, I should do ill, but that I
should do nothing. No man did ever suspect I would prove a bad, but an uuprofitable
man: foreseeing in me rather a kind of idlenesse than a voluntary craftinesse. I am not so
self-conceited but I perceive what has followed. The complaints that are daily buzzed in
mine ears are these; that I am idle, cold, and negligent in offices of friendship, and dutie
to my parents and kinsfolk; and touching public offices, that I am over singular and
disdainfull. And those that are most injurious cannot aske, why I have taken, and
why I have not paied? but may rather demand, why I do not quit, and why I do not
give? I would take it as a favor, they should wish such effects of supererogation in me.
But they are unjust and over partiall, that will go about to exact that from me wh ich I
owe not, with more rigour than they will exact from themselves that which they owe;
wherein if they condemne me, they utterly cancell both the gratifying of the action, and

the gratitude, which thereby would be due to me. Whereas the active well doing should be
of more consequence, proceeding from my hand, in regard I have no passive at all.
Wherefore I may so much the more feetly dispose of my fortune, by how much more it is
mine, and of my self that am most my own. Notwithstanding, if I were a great
blazoner of my own actions, I might perhaps barre such reproches, and justly
upbraid some, that they are not so much offended, because I do not enough, as for that I
may, and it lies in my power to do much more than I do. Yet my mind ceased not at the
same time to have peculiar unto itself well setled motions, true and open judgements
concerning the objects which it knew; which alone, and without any helpe or
communication it would digest. And amongst other things, I ver ily believe it would have
proved altogether incapable and unfit to yield unto forces or stoop unto violence. Shall I
account or relate this quality of my infancie, which was, a kind of boldness in my
looks, and gentle softnesse in my voice, and affabilitie in my gestures, and a dexterite in
conforming my self to the parts I undertook? for before the age of the and
Alter ab undecimo tum me vix ceperat annus. Virg. Buc. Ecl. viii. 39.
Yeares had I (to make even)
Scarce two above eleven.
I have under-gone and represented the chiefest parts in the Latin Tragedies of Buchanan,
Guerenti, and of Muret; which in great state were acted and plaid in our College of
Guyenne: wherein Andreas Goveanus our Rector principal; who as in all other parts
belonging to his charge, was without comparison the chiefest Rector of France, and my
self (without ostentation be it spoken) was reputed, if not a chief master yet a principal
Actor in them. It is an exercise I rather commend than disalow in young Gentlemen: and
have seen some of our Princes (in imitation of some of former ages) both commendably
and honestly, in their proper persons act and play some parts in Tragedies. It has
heretofore been esteemed a lawfull exercise, and a tolerable profession in men of honor,
namely in Greece. Aristoni tragico actori rem aperit: huic et genus et fortuna honesta
erant: nec ars, quia nihil tale apud Græcos pudori est, ea deformabat ((Liv. dec. iii. 4).
’He imparts the matter to Ariston a Player of tragedies, whose progenie and fortune were
both honest; nor did his profession disgrace them, because no such matter is a
disparagement amongst the Greeks.’
And I have ever accused them of impertinencie, that condemne and disalow such kindes
of recreations, and blame those of injustice that refuse good and honest Comedians, or (as
we call them) Players, to enter our good townes, and grudge the common people such
public sports. Politike and well ordered commonwealths endeavor rather carefully to
unite and assemble their Citizens together; as in serious offices of devotion, so in honest
exercises of recreation. Common societie and loving friendship is thereby cherished and
increased. And besides, they cannot have more formal and regular pastimes allowed them,
than such as are acted and represented in open view of all, and in the presence of the
magistrates themselves: And if I might bear sway I would think it reasonable, that

Princes should sometimes, at their proper charges, gratifie the common people with them
as an argument of a fatherly affection, and loving goodness towards them: and that in
populous and frequented cities, there should be Theatres and places appointed for such
spectacles; as a diverting of worse inconveniences, and secret actions. But to come to my
intended purpose, there is no better way to allure the affection, and to entice the appetite:
otherwise a man shall breed but asses laden with Bookes. With jerkes of rods they have
their satchels full of learning given them to keep. Which to do well, one must not only
harbor in himself, but wed and marry the same with his mind.

Renascence
Editions

Return to


CHAPTER XXVI: IT IS FOLLIE TO REFERRE TRUTH OR FALSEHOOD TO OUR
SUFFICIENCIE






CHAPTER XXVI: IT IS FOLLIE TO REFERRE TRUTH OR FALSEHOOD TO OUR
SUFFICIENCIE
T is not perhaps without reason, that we ascribe the facilitie of
beleeving and easines of persuasion us to simplicitie and ignorance:
For me seems to have learnt heretofore, that beliefe was, as it were an
impression conceived in our mind, and according as the same was
found either more soft, or of less resistance, it was easier to imprint
anything therein. Ut necesse est lancem in libra ponderibus impositis
deprimi: sic animum perspicuis cedereAcad. Qu. iv.). ’As it is necessarie a scale must go
down the balance when weights are put into it, so must a mind yield to things that are
manifest.’ (Cic. Forasmuch, therefore, as the mind being most empty and without
counterpoize, so much the more easily does it yield under the burden of the first
persuasion. And that’s the reason why children, those of the common sort, women, and
sickefolks, are so subject to be mis-led, and so easy to swallow gudgeons. On the other
side it is a sottish presumption to disdaine and condemne that for false, which unto us

seems to bear no show of likelihood or truth which is an ordinary fault in those who
persuade themselves to be of more sufficiency than the vulgar sort. So was I sometimes
wont to do, and if I heard any body speak, either of ghosts walking, of foretelling future
things, of enchantments, of witchcrafts, or any other thing reported, which I could not well
conceive, or that was beyond my reach.
Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessali -- Hor. ii. Ep. ii. 208.
Dreames, magic terrors, witches, uncouth-wonders.
Night-walking sprites, Thessalian conjur’d-thunders.
I could not but feel a kind of compassion to see the poore and seely people abused with
such follies. And now I perceive that I was as much to be moaned myself: Not that
experience has since made me to discerne any thing beyond my former opinions: yet was
not my curiosity the cause of it, but reason has taught me, that so resolutely to condemne
a thing for false and impossible, is to assume unto himself the advantage, to have the
bounds and limits of Gods will, and of the power of our common mother Nature tied to his
sleeve: And that there is no greater folly in the world than to reduce them to the measure
of our capacitie and bounds of our sufficiencie. If we terme those things monsters or
miracles to which our reason cannot attaine, how many such do daily present themselves
unto our sight? Let us consider through what clouds, and how blinde-fold we are led to the
knowledge of most things that pass our hands: verily we shall find, it is rather custom
than science that removeth the strangenesse of them from us:
----- jam nemo fessus saturusque videndi,
Suspicere in coeli dignatur lucida templa.-- Lucr. ii.
Now no man tir’d with glut of contemplation,
Deignes to have heav’ns bright Church in admiration.
And that those things, were they newly presented unto us, we should doubtlesse deem
them as much or more unlikely and incredible than any other.
------ si nunc primum mortalibus adsint
Ex improviso, ceu sint objecta repente,
Nil magis his rebus paterat mirabile dici,
Aut minus ante quod auderent fore credere gentes. -- 1042.
If now first on a sudden they were here
Mongst mortal men, object to eye or eare,
Nothing than these things would more wondrous be,
Or that, men durst less think, ever to see.

He who had never seen a river before, the first he saw be thought it to be the Ocean:
and things that are the greatest in our knowledge, we judge them to be the extremest that
nature worketh in that kind.
Scilicet et fluvius qui non est maximum, ei est
Qui non ante aliquem majorem vidit, ei ingens
Arbor homoque videtur, et omnia de qenere omni
Maxima quæ vi dit quisque, hæc ingentia fingit. -- vi. 671.
A streame none of the greatest, may so seem
To him, that never saw a greater streame.
Trees, men, seem huge, and all things of all sorts,
The greatest one has seen, he huge reports.
Consuetudine oculorum assuescunt animi neque admirantur, neque requirunt rationes
earum rerum, quas semper vident (Cic. Nat. De. ii.). ’Mindes are acquainted by custom
of their eyes, nor do they admire or enquire the reason of those things which they
continually behold.’ The novelty of things does more incite us to search out the causes,
than their greatness: we must judge of this infinite power of nature, with more reverence,
and with more acknowledgement of our own ignorance and weaknesse. How many
things of small likelihood are there, witnessed by men, worthie of credit, whereof if we
cannot be persuaded, we should at least leave them in suspence? For to deem them
impossible, is by rash presumption to presume and know how far possibilitie reacheth. If
a man did well understand, what difference there is betweene impossibilitie, and that
which is unwonted, and betweene that which is against the course of nature and the
common opinion of men, in not beleeving rashly, and in not dis-beleeving easily; the rule
of Nothing too-much, commanded by Chilon, should be observed. When we find in
Froisard, that the Earle of Foix (being in Bearne) had knowledge of the defeature at
Inberoth of King John of Castile, the morrow next it hapned, and the means he alleageth
for it, a man may well laugh at it: And of that which our Annales report, that Pope
Honorius, the very same day that King Philip AugustusMantes, caused his public
funerals to be solemnized, and commanded them to be celebrated throughout all Italie.
For, the authority of the witnesses has perhaps no sufficient warrant to restraine us.
But what if Plutarke, besides diverse examples which he alleageth of antiquitie, says to
have certainly known, that in Domitians time the news of the battle lost by Antonius in
Germany many days journeies thence, was published in Rome, and divulged through the
world the very same day it succeeded: And if Cæsar holds that it has many time
happened, that report has foregone the accident: Shall we not say that those simple
people have suffered themselves to be cousened and seduced by the vulgar sort, because
they were not as clear-sighted as he? Is there any thing more daintie, more unspotted, and
more lively than Plinies judgement, whensoever it pleaseth him to make show of it? Is
there any farther from vanity? I omit the excellencie of his learning and knowledge,
whereof I make but small reckoning: in which of those two parts do we exceed him? Yet

there is no scholler so meanely learned but will convince him of lying, and read a lecture
of contradiction against him upon the progresse of natures works. And when we read in
Bouchet the myracles wrought by the reliques of Saint Hillarie, his credit is not sufficient
to barre us the liberty of contradicting him: yet at random to condemne all such like
histories, seems to me a notable impudencie. That famous man, Saint Augustine,
witnesseth to have seen a blinde child to recover his sight, over the reliques of Saint
Gervase and Protaise, at Milan: and a woman at Carthage to have become cured of a
canker by the sign of the holy Crosse, which a woman newly baptized made unto her: and
Hesperius a familiar friend of his, to have expelled certain spirits that molested his house,
with a little of the earth of our Saviours sepulcher; which earth being afterwards
transported into a Church, a Paralitike man was immediately therewith cured: and a
woman going in procession, having as she past by with a nose-gaie touched the case
wherein Saint Stevens bones were, and with the same afterward rubbed her eyes, she r
ecovered her sight, which long before she had utterly lost: and diverse other examples,
where he affirmeth to have been an assistant himself. What shal we accuse him of, and
two other holy Bishops, Aurelius and Maximmus, whom he calleth for his witnesses? Shal
it be of ignorance, of simplicity, of malice, of facility, or of imposture? Is any man living
so impudent, that thinks he may be compared to them, whether it be in virtue or piety, in
knowledge or judgement, in wisdom or sufficiency? Qui ut rationem nulllam afferent,
ipsa auctoritate me frangerent (Cic. Div. i.). ’Who though they alleged no reason, yet
might subdue me with their very authority.’ It is a dangerous foolish hardinesse, and of
consequence, besides the absurd temerity it draws with it, to despise what we conceive
not. For, after that according to your best understanding, you have established the limits of
truth and bounds of falsehood, and that it is found you must necessarily believe things
wherein is more strangenesse, than in those you deny; you have alreadie bound your self
to abandon them. Now that which me thinkes brings as much disorder in our consciences,
namely in these troubles of religion wherein we are, is the dispensation Catholikes make
of their beliefe. They suppose to show themselves very moderate and skilfull, when they
yield their adversaries any of those articles now in question. But besides that, they
perceive not what an advantage it is for him that chargeth you, if you but once begin to
yield and give them ground; and how much that encorageth him to pursue his point: those
articles which they chuse for the lightest, are often times most important. Either a man
must wholy submit himself to the authority of our Ecelesiasticall policy, or altogether
dispence himself from it: It is not for us to determine what part of obedience we owe
unto it. And moreover, I may say it, because I have made trial of it, having sometimes
used this liberty of my choice, and particular election, not regarding certain points of the
observance of our Church, which seem to bear a face either more vain or more strange;
coming to communicate them with wise men, I have found that those things have a most
solid and steadie foundation, and that it is but foolishnesse and ignorance, makes us
receive them with less respect and reverence than the rest. Why remember we not, what,
and how many, contradictions we find and feel even in our own judgement? How many
things served us but yesterday as articles of faith, which to day we deem but fables?
Glory and curiosity are the scourges of our soules. The latter induceth us to have an oar

in every ship, and the former forbids us to leave anything unresolved or undecided. died at

Renascence
Editions

Return to


CHAPTER XXVII: OF FRIENDSHIP






CHAPTER XXVII: OF FRIENDSHIP
ONSIDERING the proceeding of a Painters work I have, a desire has
possessed me to imitate him: He maketh choice of the most
convenient place and middle of everie wall, there to place a picture,
laboured with all his skill and sufficiencie; and all void places about it
he filleth up with antike Boscage or Crotesko works; which are
fantastic pictures, having no grace, bnt in the variety and
strangenesse of them. And what are these my compositions in truth, other than antike
works and monstrous bodies, patched and hudled up together of diverse members without
any certain or well ordered figure, having neither order, dependencie, or proportion, but
casual and framed by chance?
Definit in piscem mulier formosa superne. -- HOR. Art. Poet. 4.
A woman fair for parts superior,
Ends in a fish for parts inferior.

Touching this second point I go as far as my Painter, but for the other and better part I
am far behinde: for my sufficiency reacheth not so far as that I dare undertake a rich, a
polished, and, according to true skill, an art-like table. I have advised myself to borr ow
one of Steven de la Boetic, who with this kind of work shall honor all the world. It is a
discourse he entitled Voluntary_Servitude, but those who have not known him, have
since very properly baptized the same, The Against-one. In his first youth he wrote, by way
of Essaie, in honor of libertie_against_Tyrants. It has long since been dispersed
amongst men of understanding, not without great and well deserved commendations: for it
is full of wit and containeth as much learning as may be: yet does it differ much from the
best he can do. And if in the age I knew him in, he would have undergone my dessigne to
set his fantasies down in writing, we should doubtlesse see many rare things, and which
would very meerely approch the honor of antiquity: for especially touching that part of
natures gifts, I know none may be compared to him. But it was not long of him, that ever
this Treatise came to mans view, and I believe he never saw it since it first escaped his
hands: with certain other notes concerning the edict of Januarie, famous by reason of our
intestine war, which perhaps in other places find their deserved praise. It is all I could
ever recover of his reliques (whom when death seized, he by his last will and testament,
left with so kind remembrance, heir and executor of his librarie and writings) besides
the little book, I since caused to be published: To which his pamphlet I am particularly
most bounden, for so much as it was the instrumentall meane of our first acquaintance.
For it was showed me long time before I saw him; and gave me the first knowledge of his
name, addressing, and thus nourishing that unspotted friendship which we (so long as it
has pleased God) have so sincerely, so entire and inviolably maintained between us, that
truly a man shall not commonly hear of the like; and amongst our modern men no signe
of any such is seen. So many parts are re quired to the erecting of such a one, that it may
be counted a wonder if fortune once in three ages contract the like. There is nothing to
which Nature has more addressed us than to societie. And Aristotle says that perfect Law-
givers have had more regardful care of friendship than of justice. And the utmost drift of
its perfection is this. For generally, all those amities nourished by voluptuousness or
profit, public or private need, are thereby so much the less fair and and so much the
less true amities, in that they intermeddle other causes, scope, and fruit with friendship,
than itself alone: Nor do those foure ancient kindes of friendships, Naturall, social,
hospitable, and venerian, either particularly or conjointly beseeme the same. That from
children to parents may rather be termed respect: Friendship is nourished by
communication, which by reason of the over-great disparitie cannot be found in them,
and would happly offend the duties of nature: for neither all the secret thoughts of parents
can be communicated unto children, lest it might engender an unbeseeming familiaritie
betweene them, nor the admonitions and corrections (which are the chiefest offices of
friendship) could be exercised from children to parents. There have nations been found,
where, by custom, children killed their parents, and others where parents slew their
children, thereby to avoid the hindrance of enterbearing one another in after times: for
naturally one dependeth from the ruine of another. There have Philosophers been found

disdaining this natural conjunction: witness Aristippus, who being urged with the
affection he ought his children, as proceeding from his loyns, began to spit, saying, That
also that excrement proceeded from him, and that also we engendred wormes and lice.
And that other man, whom Plutarke would have persuaded to agree with his brother,
answered, ’I care not a straw the more for him, though he came out of the same wombe I
did.’ Verily the name of Brother is a glorious name, and full of loving kindness, and
therefore did he and I terme one another sworne brother: but this commixture, dividence,
and sharing of goods, this joyning wealth to wealth, and that the riches of one shall be the
povertie of another, does exceedingly distemper and distract all brotherly alliance, and
lovely conjunction: If brothers should conduct the progresse of their advancement and
thrift in one same path and course, they must necessarily oftentimes hinder and crosse one
another. Moreover, the correspondencie and relation that begetteth these true and mutually
perfect amities, why shall it be found in these? The father and the son may very well be
of a far differing complexion, and so many brothers. He is my son, he is my kinsman;
but he may be foole, a bad, or a peevish-minded man. And then according as they are
friendships which the law and dutie of nature does command us, so much the less of our
own voluntarie choice and liberty is there required unto it: And our genuine liberty has
no production more properly her own, than that of affection and amitie. Sure I am, that
concerning the same I have assaied all that might be, having had the best and most
indulgent father that ever was, even to his extremest age, and who from father to son
was descended of famous house, and touching this rare-seen virtue of brotherly concord
very exemplare:
------ et ipse
Notus in fratres ommi paterni. -- Hor ii. Od. ii 6.
To his brothers known so kind,
As to bear a fathers mind.
To compare the affection toward women unto it although it proceed from our own free
choice, a man cannot, nor may it be placed in this rank: Her fire, I confesse it
(----- neque enim est dea nescia nostri
Quæ dulcem curis miscat amaritiem.)
(Nor is that Goddesse ignorant of me,
Whose bitter-sweets with my cares mixed be.)
to be more active, more fervent, and more sharpe. But it is a rash and wavering fire,
waving and diverse: the fire of an ague subject to fits and stints, and that has but slender
hold-fast of us. In true friendship, it is a general and universall heat, and equally
tempered, a constant and setled heat, all pleasure and smoothnes, that has no pricking or

stinging in it, which the more it is in lustfull love, the more is it but a raging and mad
desire in following that which flies us,
Come seque la lepre il cacciatore
Al fredo, al caldo, alla montagna, al lito,
Ne piu l’estima poi che presa vede,
E sol dietro a chi fugge afretta il piede.--Arios. can. x. st. 7.
Ev’n as the huntsman does the hare pursue, I
n cold, in heat, on mountaines, on the shore,
But cares no more, when he her ta’en espies,
Speeding his pace only at that which flies.
As soone as it creepeth into the termes of friendship, that is to say, in the agreement of
wits, it languisheth and vanisheth away: enjoying does lose it, as having a corporall end,
and subject to satietie. On the other side, friendship is enioyed according as it is desired, it
is neither bred, nor nourished, nor increaseth but in jovissance, as being spirituall, and the
mind being refined by use custom. Under this chief amitie, these fading affections have
cometimes found place in me, lest I should speak of him, who in his verses speaks but
too much of it. So are these two passions entered into me in knowledge one of another;
but in comparison never: the first flying a high, and keeping a proud pitch, disdainfully
beholding the other to pass her points far under it. Concerning marriage besides that it
is a covenant which has nothing free but the entrance, the continuance being forced and
constrained depending else-where than from our will, and a match ordinarily concluded to
other ends: A thousand strange knots are therein commonly to be unknit, able to break the
web, and trouble the whole course of a lively affection; whereas in friendship there is no
commerce or busines depending on the same, but itself. Seeing (to speak truly) that the
ordinary sufficiency of women cannot answer this conference and communication the
nurse of this sacred bond: nor seem their mindes strong enough to endure the pulling of a
knot so hard so fast, and durable. And truly, if without that, such a genuine and voluntarie
acquaintance might be contracted, where not only mindes had this entire jovissance, but
also bodies, a share of the alliance, and where a man might wholly be engaged: It is
certain, that friendship would thereby be more compleat and full: But this sex could
never yet by any example attaine unto it, and is by ancient schooles rejected thence. And
this other Greeke licence is justly abhorred by our customs, which notwithstandnlg,
because according to use it had so necessarie a disparitie of ages, and diference of offices
betweene lovers, did no more sufficiently answer the perfect union and agreement, which
here we require: Quis est enim iste amor amicitiiæ? cur neque deformem adolescentem
quisquam amat, neque formosum senem? (Cic. Tusq. Que. iv.) ’For, what love is this of
friendship? why does no man love either a deformed young man, or a beautifull old man?’
For even the picture the Academie makes of it, will not (as I suppose) disavowe me, to
say thus in her behalfe: That the first fury, enspired by the son of Venus in the lovers hart,
upon the object of tender youths-flower, to which they allow all insolent and passionate

violences, an immoderate heat may produce, was simply grounded upon an externall
beauty; a false image of corporall generation: for in the spirit it had no power, the sight
whereof was yet concealed, which was but in his infancie, and before the age of budding.
For, if this fury did seize upon a base minded courage, the means of its pursuit were
riches, gifts, favor to the advancement of dignities, and such like vile merchandice,
which they reprove. If it fell into a more generous mind, the interpositions were likewise
generous: Philosophicall instructions, documents to reverence religion, to obey the laws,
to die for the good of his countrie: examples of valor, wisdom and justice; the lover
endevoring and studying to make himself acceptable by the good grace and beauty of his
mind (that of his body being long since decayed) hoping by this mentatll societie to
establish a more firme and permanent bargaine. When this pursuit attained the effect in
due season (for by not requiring in a lover, he should bring leisure and discretion in his
enterprise, they require it exactly in the beloved; forasmuch as he was to judge of an
internall beauty, of a difficile knowledge, and abstruse discovery) then by the interposition
of a spiritual beauty was the desire of a spiritual conception engendred in the beloved. The
latter was here chiefest; the corporall, accidentall and second, altogether contrary to the
lover. And therefore do they prefer the beloved, and verifie that the gods likewise
prefer the same: and greatly blame the Poet Æschylus, who in the love betweene
Achilles and Patroclus ascribeth the lovers part unto Achilles, who was in the first and
beardlesse youth of his adolescency and the fairest of the Græcians. After this general
communitie, the mistris and worthiest part of it, predominant and exercising her offices
(they say the most availefull commodity did thereby redound both to the private and
public). That it was the force of countries received the use of it, and the principal
defense of equitie and liberty: witness the comfortable loves of Hermodius and
Aristogiton. Therefore name they it sacred and divine, and it concerns not them whether
the violence of tyrants, or the demisnesse of the people be against them: To conclude, all
that can be alleged in favor of the Academy, is to say, that it was friendship, a thing
which has no bad reference unto the Stoical definition of love: Amorem conatunt esse
amicitiæ faciendæ ex pulchritudinis specie. (CIC. Tusc. Qu. ii,. c. 84. 2) ’That love is an
endeavor of making friendship, by the show of beautie.’ I return to my description in a
more equitable and equall manner. Omnino amicitiæ, corroboratis jam confirmatisque,
ingeniis et ætatibus, judicandæ sunt (Cic. Amic.): ’Clearely friendships are to be judged
by wits, and ages already strengthened and confirmed.’ As for the rest, those we ordinarily
call friendes and amities, are but æquaintances and familiarities, tied together by some
occasion or commodities, by means whereof our mindes are entertained. In the amitie I
speak of, they entermixe and confound themselves one in the other, with so universall a
commixture, that they weare out and can no more find the seame that has conjoined
them together. If a man urge me to tell wherfore I loved him, I feel it cannot be
expressed, but by answering; Because it was he, because it was myself. There is beyond
all my discourse, and besides what I can particularly report of it I know not what
inexplicable and fatall power a meane and a mediatrix of this indissoluble union. We
sought one another before we had seen one another, and by the reports we heard one of
another; which wrought greater violence in us, than the reason of reports may well bear; I

think by some secret ordinance of the heavens, we embraced one another by our names.
And at our first meeting which was by chance at a great feast, and solemn meeting of a
whole towneship, we found ourselves so surprised, so known, so acquainted, and so
combinedly bound together, that from thenceforward, nothing was so neer unto us as one
unto anothers. He wrote an excellent Latyne Satyre since published; by which he excuseth
and expoundeth the precipitation of our acquaintance, so suddenly come to her perfection;
Sithence it must continue so short a time, and begun so late (for we were both grown
men, and he some years older than my self) there was no time to be lost. And it was not
to be modelled or directed by the paterne of regular and remisse friendship, wherein so
many precautions of a long and preallable conversation are required. This has no other
Idea than of itself, and can have no reference but to itself. It is not one especiall
consideration, nor two, nor three, nor foure, nor a thousand: It is I wot not what kind of
quintessence, of all this commixture, which having seized all my will, induced the same to
plunge and lose itself in his, which likewise having seized all his will, brought it to lose
and plunge itself in mine, with a mutual greedinesse, and with a semblable concurrance.
I may truly say, lose, reserving nothing unto us, that might properly be called our own,
nor that was either his or mine. When Lelius in the presence of the Roman Consuls, who
after the condemnation of Tiberius Gracchus, pursued all those that had been of his
acquaintance, came to enquire of Caius Blosius (Who was one of his chiefest friends)
what he would have done for him, and that he answered, ’All things.’ ’What, all things?’
replied he. ’And what if he had willed you to burne our temples?’ Blosius answered, ’He
would never have commanded such a thing.’ ’But what if he had done it?’ replied Lelius.
The other answered, ’I would have obeyed him.’ If he were so perfect a friend to
Gracchus as histories report, he needed not offend the Consuls with this last and bold
confession, and should not have departed from the assurance he had of Gracchus his
mind. But yet those who accuse this answer as seditious, understand not well this
mysterie: and do not presuppose in what termes he stood, and that he held Gracchus his
will in his sleeve, both by power and knowledge. They were rather friends than Citizens,
rather friends than enemies of their countrey, or friends of ambition and trouble. Having
absolutely committed themselves one to another, they perfectly held the reines of one
anothers inclination: and let this yoke be guided by virtue and conduct of reason (because
without them it is altogether, impossible to combine and proportion the same). The answer
of Blosius was such as it should be. If their affections miscarried, according to my
meaning, they were neither friends one to other, nor friends to themselves. As for the rest,
this answer sounds no more than mine would do, to him that would in such sort enquire
of me; if your will should command you to kill your daughter, would you do it? and that
I should consent unto it: for, that heareth no witness of consent to do it: because I am
not in doubt of my will, and as little of such a friends will. It is not in the power of the
worlds discourse to remove me from the certaintie I have of his intentions and judgments
of mine: no one of its actions might be presented unto me, under what shape soever, but I
would presently linde the spring and motion of it. Our mindes have jumped so unitedly
together, they have with so fervent an affection consideredof each other, and with like
affection so discovered and sounded, even to the very bottome of each others heart and

entrails, that I did not only know his, as well as my own, but would (verily) rather have
trusted him concerning any matter of mine than my self. Let no man compare any of the
other common friendships to this. I have as much knowledge of them as another, indeed of
the perfectest of their kind; yet wil I not persuade any man to confound their rules, for so
a man might be deceived. In these other strict friendships a man must march with the
bridle of wisdom and precaution in his hand: the bond is not so strictly tied but a man
may in some sort distrust the same. Love him (said Chilon) as if you should one day hate
him again. Hate him as if you should love him again. This precept, so abhominable in
this sovereign and mistris Amitie, is necessarie and wholesome in the use of vulgar and
customarie friendships: toward which a man must employ the saying Aristotle was wont
so often repeat, ’Oh ye friends, there is no perfect friend.’
In this noble commerce, offices and benefits (nurses of other amities) deserve not so
much as to be accounted of: this confusion so full of our wills is cause of it: for even as
the friendship I bear unto my self, admits no accrease, by any succour I give my self in
any time of need, whatsoever the Stoices allege; and as I acknowledge no thanks unto
my self for any service I do unto myself so the union of such friends, being truly of
perfect, makes them lose the feeling of such duties, and hate, and expell from one another
these words of division and difference: benefit, good deed, dutie, obligation,
acknowledgement, prayer, thanks, and such their like. All things being by effect common
betweene them. Wils, thoughts, judgements, goods, wives, children, honor, and life; and
their mutual agreement, being no other than one soul in two bodies, according to the fit
definition of Aristotle, they can neither lend or give ought to each other. See here the
reason why Lawmakers, to honor marriage with some imaginary resenmblance of this
divine bond, inhibite donations between husband and wife; meaning thereby to inferre,
that all things should peculiarly be proper to each of them, and that they have nothing to
divide and share together. If in the friendship whereof I speak, one might give unto
another, the receiver of the benefit should binde his fellow. Fore each seeking more than
any other thing to do each other good, he who yields both matter and occasion, is the
man sheweth himself liberall, giving his friend that contentment, to effect towards him
what he desires most. When the Philosopher Diogenes wanted money, he wvas wont to
say that he redemanded the same of his friends, and not that he demanded it: And to show
how that is practised by effect, I will relate an ancient singular example. Eudamidas the
Corinthian had two friends: Charixenus a Sycionian, and Aretheus a Corinthian; being
upon his death-bed, and very poore, and his two friends very rich, thus made his last will
and testament: ’To Aretheus, I bequeath the keeping of my mother, and to maintaine her
when she shall be old: To Charixenus the marrying of my daughter, and to give her as
great a dowry as he may: and in case one of them shall chance to die before, I appoint the
survivor to substitute his charge, and supply his place.’ Those that first saw this testament
laughed and mocked at the same; but his heirs being advertised thereof, were very well
pleased, and received it with singular contentment. And Charixenus, one of them, dying
five dayes after Eudamidas, the substitution being declared in favor of Aretheus, he
carefully and very kindly kept and maintained his mother, and of the five talents that he
was worth he gave two and a halfe in marriage to one only daughter he had, and the other

two and a halfe to the daughter of Eudamidas, whom he married both in one day. This
example is very ample, if one thing were not, which is the multitude of friends: For, this
perfect amity I speak of, is indivisible: each man does so wholly give himself unto his
friend, that he has nothing left him to divide else-where: moreover he is grieved that he is
[not] double, triple, or quadruple, and has not many soules or sundry wils, that he might
conferre them all upon this subject. Common friend-ships may be divided; a man may
love beauty in one, facility of behaviour in another and wisdom in another, paternity in
this, fraternitie in that man, and so forth: but this amitie that possesseth the soul, and
swaies it in all soveraigntie, it is impossible it should be double. If two at one instant
should require helpe, to which would you run? Should they crave contrary offices of you,
what order would you follow? Should one commit a matter to your silence, which if the
other knew would greatly profit him, what course would you take? Or how would you
discharge yourselfe? A singular and principal friendship disolveth all other duties, and
freeth all othet obligations. The secret I have sworne not to reveale to another, I may
without perjurie impart it unto him, who is no other but my self. It is a great and strange
wonder for a man to double himself; and those that talk of tripling know not, nor cannot
reach into the height of it. ’Nothing is extreme that has his like.’ And he who shal
presuppose that of two I love the one as well as the other, and that they enter-love one
another, and love me as much as I love them: he multiplieth in brother-hood, a thing most
singular, and a lonely one, and than which one alone is also the rarest to be found in the
world. The remainder of this history agrees very well with what I said; for, Eudamidas
gives us a grace and favor to his friends to employ them in his need: he leaveth them as
his heirs of his liberality, which consisteth in putting the means into their hands to do
him good. And doubtlesse the force of friendship is much more nobly shewen in his deed
than in Aretheus. To conclude, they are imaginable effects to him that has not tasted
them; and which makes me wonderfully to honor the answer of that young Souldier to
Cyrus, who enquiring of him what he would take for a horse with which he had lately
gained the prize of a race, and whether he would change him for a Kingdome? ’No surely,
my Liege (said he), yet would I willingly forgoe him to gain a true friend, could I but
find a man worthy of so precious an alliance.’ He said not ill, in saying ’could I but find.’
For, a man shall easily find men fit for a superficial acquaintance; but in this, wherein
men negotiate from the very centre of their harts, and make no spare of any thing, it is
moste requisite all the wards and springs be sincerely wrought and perfectly true. In
confederacies, which hold but by one end, men have nothing to provide for, but for the
imperfections, which particularly do interest and concerne that end and respect. It is no
great matter what religion my Physician or Lawyer is of: this consideration has nothing
in common with the offices of that friendship they owe me. So do I in the familiar
acquaintances that those who serve me contract with me. I am nothing inquisitive whether
a Lackey be chaste or no, but whether he be diligent: I fear not a gaming Muletier, so
much as if he be weake; nor a hot swearing Cooke, as one that is ignorant and unskilfull; I
never meddle with saying what a man should do in the world; there are over man others
that do it; but what my self do in the world.

Mihi sic usus est: Tibi, ut opus est facto, face. -- Ter. Heau. act. i. sc. 1, 28.
So is it requisite for me;
Doe you as needfull is for you.
Concerning familiar table-talk, I rather acquaint my self with and follow a merry
conceited humor, than a wise man: And in bed I rather prefer beauty than goodnesse; and
in society or conversation of familiar discourse, I respect rather sufficiencye though
without Preud’hommie, and so of all things else. Even as he that was found riding on an
hobby-horse, playing with his children besought him who thus surprised him not to
speak of it until he were were a father himself, supposing the tender fondnesse and
fatherly passion which then would posesse his mind should make him an impartiall judge
of such an action; so would I wish to speak to such as had tried what I speak of: but
knowing how far such an amitie is from the common use, and how seld seen and rarely
found, I looke not to find a competent judge. For, even the discourses, which stern
antiquitie has left us concermng this subject, seem to me but faint and forcelesse in
respect of the feeling I have of it: And in that point the effects exceed the very precepts of
philosophie.
Nil ego contulerim jucundo sanus antico.-- Hor. i. Sat. v 44.
For me, be I well in my wit.
Nought, as a merry friend, so fit.
Ancient Menander accounted him happy that had but met the shadow of a true friend:
verily he had reason to say so, especially if he had tasted of any: for truly, if I compare all
the rest of my forepassed life, which although I have, by the meere mercy of God, past at
rest and ease, and except the loss of so dear a friend, free from all grievous affliction,
with an ever-quietnesse of mind, as one that have taken my natural and originall
commodities in good payment, without searching any others: if, as I say, I compare it all
unto the foure years I so happily enjoyed the dear society of that worthy man, it is
nought but a vapour, nought but a darke and yrksome light. Since the time I lost him,
quem semper acerbum,
Semper honoratum (sic Dii voluistis) habebo. Virg. Æn. iii. 49.
Which I shall ever hold a bitter day,
Yet ever honor’d (so my God t’obey).
I do but languish, I do but sorrow: and even those pleasures, all things present me with,
in stead of yielding me comfort, do but redouble the grief of his loss. We were
copartners in all things. All things were with us at halfe; me thinkes I have stolne his part

from him.
---- Nec fas esse ulla me voluptate hic frui
Decrevi, tantisper dum ille abest meus particeps. -- Ter. Heau. act. 1. sc. i,
97.
I have set down, no joy enjoy I may.
As long as he my partner is away.
I was so accustomed to be ever two, and so enured to be never single, that me thinks I am
but halfe my self.
Illam mea si partem animæ tulit,
Maturior vis, quid moror altera,
Nec charus æque nec superestes,
Integer? Ille dies utramque
Duxit ruinam. -- Hor. ii. Od. xvii. 5.
Since that part of my soul riper fate reft me,
Why stay I here the other part he left me?
Not so dear, nor entire, while here I rest:
That day has in one ruine both opprest.
There is no action can betide me, or imagination possesse me, but I hear him saying, as
indeed he would have done to me; for even as he did excel me by an infinite distance in
all other sufficiencies and vertues, so did he in all offices and duties of friendship.
Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus,
Tam chari capitis? -- i. Od. xxiv. 1.
What modesty or measure may I bear,
In want and wish of him that was so dear?
O misero frater adempte mihi!
Omnia tecum una perierunt gaudia nostra.
Quæ tuus in vita dulcis alebat amor.
Tu mea, tu moriens fregisti commoda frater.
Tecum una tota est nostra sepulta anima,
Cujus ego interitu tota demente fugavi
Hæc studia, atque omnes delicias animi.
Alloquar? audiero nunquam tua verba loquentem
Numquam eqo te vita frater amabilior,

Aspiciam posthac? at certe semper amabo. -- Catul. Eleg. iv. 20, 92, 23, 95,
21, 94, 25; El. i. 9.
O brother rest from miserable me,
All our delights are perished with you,
Which your sweet love did nourish in my breath.
With you my soul is all and whole inshrinde,
At whose death I have cast out of my mind
All my mindes sweet-meats, studies of this kind
Never shall I, hear you speak, sapeake with you?
Thee brother, than life dearer, ne ver see?
Yet shall you ever be belov’d of me,
but let us a little hear this yong man speak, being but sixteene years of age.
Because I have found this work to have since been published (and to an ill end) by
such as seek to trouble and subvert the state of our common-wealth, nor caring whether
they shall reforme it or no; which they have fondly inserted among other writings of their
invention, I have revoked my intent, which was to place it here. And lest the Authors
memory should any way be interassed with those that could not throughly know his
opinions and actions, they shall understand that this subject was by him treated of in his
infancie, only by way of exercise, as a subject, common, bare-worne, and wyer-drawne in
a thousand bookes. I will never doubt but he beleeved what he wrote, and wrote as be
thought: for he was so conscientious that no lie did ever pass his lips, indeed were it but in
matters of sport or play: and I know, that had it been in his choyce , he would rather have
been borne at Venice than at Sarlac; and good reason why: But he had another maxime
deepely imprinted in his mind, which was, carefully to obey, and religiously to submit
himself to the laws, under which he was borne. There was never a better citizen, nor
more affected to the welfare and quietnesse of his countrie, nor a sharper enemy of the
changes, innovations, newfangles, and hurly-burlies of his time: He would more willingly
have employed the utmost of his endevours to extinguish and suppresse, than to favor or
further them: His mind was modelled to the patterne of other best ages. But yet in
exchange of his serious treatise, I will here set you down another, more pithie, materiall,
and of more consequence, by him likewise produced at that tender age.




Return to


CHAPTER XXVIII. NINE AND TWENTIE SONNETS OF STEVEN DE LA BOETIE, TO THE
LADY OF GRAMMONT, COUNTESSE OF GUISSEN.






CHAPTER XXVIII.
NINE AND TWENTIE SONNETS OF STEVEN DE LA BOETIE,
TO THE LADY OF GRAMMONT, COUNTESSE OF GUISSEN
ADAME, I present you with nothing that is mine, either because it is
already yours, or because I find nothing therein worthy of you. But
wherever these verses shall be seen, for the honor which thereby
shall redound to them, by having this glorious Corisanda of Andoins for
their guide, I thought it good to adorn them with your worthy name. I
have deemed this present fit for your Ladiship, forasmuch as there are
few Ladies in France, that either can better judge of Poesie, or fitter
apply the use of it, than your worthy self: and since in these her drooping days, none can
give it more life, or vigorous spirit, than you, by those rich and high-tuned accords,
wherewith amongst a million of other rare beauties Nature has richly graced you.

Madame, these verses deserve to be cherished by you: and I am persuaded you will be of
mine opinion; which is that none have come out of Gaskonie, that either had more wit or
better invention and that witness to have proceeded from a richer veine. And let no
jealousie possesse you, inasmuch as you have but the remainder of that which whilome I
caused to be printed under the name of my Lord of Foix, your worthy, noble and dear
kinsman: For truly, these have a kind of livelinesse, and more piercing Emphasis than
any other, and which I cannot well express: as he that made them in his Aprile youth,
and when he was enflamed with a noble glorious flame, as I will one day tell your honor
in your eare. The other were afterward made by him in favor of his wife, at what time he
wooed and solicited her for marriage, and began to feel I wot not what martiall chilnesse
and husbands coldnesse. And I am one of those whose opinion is, that divine Poesie does
no where fadge so well, and so effectually applaudeth, as in a youthfull, wanton, and
unbridled subject. The above mentioned nine and twentie Sonnets of Boetie, and that in
the former impressions of this book were here set down, have since been printed with
his other works.



Return to


CHAPTER XXIX: OF MODERATION.






CHAPTER XXIX: OF MODERATION.
S if our sense of feeling were infected, we corrupt by our touching,
things that in themselves are fair and good. We may so seize on virtue,
that if we embrace it with an over greedy and violent desire, it may
become vitious. Those who say, ’There is never excess in virtue,
because it is no longer virtue if any excess be in it,’ do but jest at
words.
Insani sapiens nomen ferat, æquus iniqui,
Vltra quam satis est, virtutem si petat ipsam. -- Hor. i. Epi. vi. 15.
A wise man mad, just unjust, may I name,
More than is meet, een virtue if he claime.
Philosophy is a subtile consideration. A man may love virtue too much, and excessively

demeane himself in a good action. Gods holy worde does apply itself to this byase: Be
not wiser than you should, and be soberly wise. I have seen some great men, blemish the
reputation of their religion, by shewing themselves religious beyond the example of men
of their quality. I love temperate and indifferent natures. Immoderation towards good, if it
offend me not, it amazeth, and troubleth me how I should call it. Neither Pausanias his
mother, who gave the first instruction, and for her sons death brought the first stone:
Not Posthumius the Dictator, that brought his own son to his end, whom the heat and
forwardnesse of youth, had perhaps before his rank, made to charge his enemies, seem so
just as strange unto me. And I neathe r love to persuade or follow so savage and so dear
a virtue. The Archer that overshoots his marke, does no otherwise than he that shooteth
short. Mine eics trouble me as much in climbing up toward a great light, as to go down
into the darke. Callicles in Plato says, the extremity of Philosophy to be hurtful: and
perswades no man to wade further into it than the bounds of profit: And that taken with
moderation, it is pleasant and commodious, but in the end it makes a man wild and
vicious, disdainfull of religion and of common laws: an enemy of civill conversation; a
foe to humane sensualitie and worldly pleasures: incapable of all politike administration;
and unfit to assist others or to helpe himself: apt to be without revenge buffeted, and
baffled. He says true: for in her excess, she enthralleth our natural liberties, and by an
importunate wile, diverts us from the fair and plaine path, which nature traceth out for us.
The love we bear to women is very lawful; yet does Divinitie bridle and restraine the
same. I remember to have read in Saint Thomas, in a place where he condemneth
marriages of kinsfolk in forbidden degrees, this one reason amongst others: that the love
a man beareth to such a woman may be immoderate; for, if the wedlocke, or husbandlike
affection be sound and perfect, as it ought to be, and also surcharged with that a man
oweth to alliance and kindred; there is no doubt but that surcease may easily transport a
husband beyond the bounds of reason. Those Sciences that direct the manners of men, as
Divinitie and Philosophy, meddles with all things. There is no action so private and secret
may be concealed from their knowledge and jurisdiction. Well do they learne that search
and censure their liberty. It is women who communicate their parts as much as a man list
to wantonize with them: but to phisicke them bashfulness forbids them. I will then in
their behalfe teach husbands this, if there be any too much flesht upon them: which is, that
the very pleasures they have by the familiaritie of their wives, except moderately, used,
they are reproved: and not only is that, but in any other unlawfull subjects, a man may
trespasse in licentiousnesse, and offend in excess. Those shamelesse endearings, which
the first heat suggests unto us in that sportfull delight, are not only undecently, but
hurtfully employed towards our wives. Let them at least learne impudence from another
hand. They are ever broad-waking when we need them. I have used no means but
natural and simple instruction. Marriage is a religious and devout bond: and that is the
reason the pleasure a man has of it should be a moderate, staied and serious pleasure, and
mixed with severitie, it ought to be a voluptuousness somewhat circumspect and
conscientious. And because it is the chiefest of generation, there are that make a question,
whether it be lawfull to require them of copulation, as well when we have no hope of
children, as when they are over-aged, or big with child. It is an homicide, according to

Plato. Certain Nations (and amongst others, the Mahometane) abhorre Conjunction with
women great with child. Many also with those that have their monethly disease. Zenobia
received her husband but for one charge which done, all the time of her conception she let
him go at random, and that past, she gave him leave to begin again: a notable and
generous example of marriage.
Plato borroweth the narration of some needy and hunger-starven Poet of this sport. That
Jupiter one day gave his wife so hot a charge, impatient to stay till she came to bed, he
laid her along upon the floors; and by the vehemence of his pleasure forgot the urgent and
weighty resolutions lately concluded upon with the other gods of his celestiall court;
boasting he found it as sweet at that time as he had done when first he spoiled her of her
virginitie by stealthe and unknown to their parents. The Kings of Persia, called for their
wives when they went to any solemn feast, but when much drinking and wine began to
beat them in good earnest, they sent them to their chambers, seeing they could no longer
refrain, but must needs yield to sensualitie lest they should be partakers of their
immoderate lust, and in their stead sent for other women, whom this duty of respect might
not concern. All pleasures and gratifications are not well placed in all sorts of people.
Epaminondas had caused a dissolute young man to be imprisoned: Pelopidas intreated
him, that for his sake he would set him at liberty, but he refused him, and yielded to free
him at the request of an harlot of his, which likewise sued for his enlargement; saying, it
was a gratification due unto a Courtizan, and not to a Captain. Sophocles being partner
with Pericles in the Pretorship, seeing by chance a fair boy to pass by: ’Oh what a
beauteous boy goeth yonder!’ says he to Pericles: ’That speech were more fitting another
than a Pretor,’ answered Pericles, ’who ought not only to have chaste hands, but also
unpolluted eyes.’ Ælius Verus the Emperor, his wife complaining that he followed the
love of other women, answered, he did it for conscience sake, for so much as marriage
was a name of honor and dignity, and not of foolish and lascivious lust. And our
Ecclesiasticall Historie has with honor preserved the memory of that wife which sued
to be devorced from her husband, because she would not second and consent to his over-
insolent and lewde embracements. To conclude, there is no voluptuousuesse so just,
wherein excess and intemperance is not reproachfull unto us. But to speak in good
sooth, is not a man a miserable creature? He is scarce come to his own strength by his
natural condition, to taste one only compleate, entire and pure pleasure, but he laboreth
by discourse to cut it off: he is not wretched enough, except by art and study he augment
his misery.
Fortunæ miseras auximus arte vias. --Propert. iii. El. vi. 32.
Fortunes unhappie ill,
We amplifie by skill.
Humane wisdom does foolishly seek to be ingenious in exercising herself to abate
the number and diminish the pleasure of sensualities that pertaine to us: as it does
favorably and industriously in employing her devises, to paint and set a luster on evils,

before our eyes, and therewith to recreate our sense. Had I been chief of a faction, I
would have followed a more natural course, which to say true, is both commodious and
sacred, and should perhaps have made my self strong enough to limite the same.
Although our spirituall and corporall Physitians: as by covenant agreed upon betweene
them, find no way of recoverie, nor remedies for diseases of body and mind, but by
torment, grief and pain, watching, fasting, hair-shirts, far and solitarie exile,
perpetuall prison, roddes and other afflictions, have therefore been invented: But so, that
they be truly afflictions, and that there be some stinging sharpnesse in them: And that the
success be not as Gallios was, who having been confined to the ile of Lesbos, news
came to Rome, that there he lived a merry life; and what the Senate had laid upon him for
a punishment, redounded to h s commodity: whereupon they agreed to revoke him home
to his own house and wife, strictly enjoyning him to keep the same, thereby to
accommodate their punishment to his sense and feeling. For he to whom fasting should
procure health and a merrie heart, or he to whom a posion should be more healthy than
meat, it would be no longer a wholesome receipt, no more than drugs in other medicines,
are of no effect to him that takes them with appetite and pleasure. Bitternesse and
difficultie are circumstances fitting their operation. That nature which should take
Reubarbe as familiar, should no doubt corrupt the use of it; it must be a thing that hurts the
stomacke, if it shal cure it: and here the common rule failes, that infirmities are cured by
their contraries: for one ill cureth another. This impression has some reference to this
other so ancient, where some think they gratifie both heaven and earth by killing and
massaging themselves, which was universally embraced in all religions. Even in our
fathers age; Amurath at the taking of Isthmus, sacrificed six hundred young Greecians to
his fathers soul; to the end their blood might serve as a propitiation to expiate the sinnes
of the deceased. And in the new countries discovered in our days yet uncorrupted, and
virgins, in regard of ours, it is a custom well nigh received everie where. All their idolles
are sprinkled with humane blood, not without diverse examples of horrible crueltie. Some
are burnt alive, and half roasted drawne from the fire, that so they may pull out their hearts
and entrails; othersome, indeed women, are fleade quick, and with their yet-bleeaing skins,
they invest and cover others. And no less of examples of constant resolution. For these
wretched sacrifiable people, old men, women and children, some days before, go
themselves begging their almes, for the offering of their sacrifice, and all of full glee,
singing, and dancing with the rest, they present themselves to the slaughter. The
Ambassadours of the Kings of Mexico, in declaring and magnifying the greatness of their
Master to Fernando Cortez, after they had told him that he had thirty vassals, whereof
each one was able to levie a hundred thousand combatants, and that he had his residence
in the fairest and strongest City under heaven, added, moreover, that he had fiftie
thousand to sacrifice every yeare: verily some affirme that they maintaine contiuall wars
with certain mightie neighbouring Nations, not so much for the exercise and training of
their youth, as that they may have store of prisoners taken in war to supply their
sacrifices. In another province, to welcome the said Cortez, they sacrificed fiftie men at
one clap. I will tell this one story more: Some of those people having been beaten by
him, sent to know him, and to intreat him of friendship. The messengers presented him

with three kinds of presents, in this manner: Lord, if you be a fierce God, that lovest to
feed on flesh and blood, here are five slaves, eat them, and we will bring you more: if
you be a gently mild God, here is incense and feathers; but if you be a man, take these
birds and fruits, that here we present and offer unto you.



Return to


CHAPTER XXX: OF THE CANIBALLES






CHAPTER XXX: OF THE CANIBALLES
T WHAT time King Pirrhus came into Italie, after he had survaid the
marshalling of the Armie, which the Romans sent against him: ’I wot
not,’ said he, ’what barbarous men these are (for so were the Greeks
wont to call all strange nations) ’but the disposition of this Armie, which
I see, is nothing barbarous.’ So said the Greeks of that which
Flaminius sent into their countrie: And Philip viewing from a Tower the
order and distribution of the Romaine camp, in his kingdome under Publius Sulpitius
Galba. See how a man ought to take heed, lest he over-weeningly follow vulgar opinions,
which should be measured by the rule of reason, and not by the common report. I have
had long time dwelling with me a man, who for the space of ten or twelve years had
dwelt in that other worlde which in our age was lately discovered in those parts where
Villegaignon first landed, and surnamed AntartikeFrance. This discoverie of so infinit and
vast a countrie, seems worthy great consideration. I wot not whether I can warrant my
self, that some other be not discovered hereafter, sithence so many worthy men, and
better learned than we are, have so many ages been deceived in this. I fear me our eyes
be greater than our bellies, and that we have more curiosity than capacitie. We embrace
all, but we fasten nothing but wind. Plato maketh Solon to report (Plat. Tim.) that he had

learn’t of the Priests of the City of Says in Egypt, that whilom, and before the general
Deluge, there was a great land called Atlantis, situated at the mouth of the strait of
Gibraltar, which contained more firme land than Affrike and Asia together. And that the
kings of that countrie did not only possesse that Iland, but had so far entered into the
main land, that of the bredth of Affrike, they held as far as Egypt; and of Europes
length, as far as Tuscanie: and that they undertook to invade Asia, and to subdue all the
nations that compasse the Mediterranean Sea, to the gulfe of Mare-Maggiore [the Black
Sea], and to that end they traversed all Spain, France and Italie, so far as Greece,
where the Athenians made head against them; but that a while after, both the Athenians
themselves, and that great Iland, were swallowed up by the Deluge. It is very likely this
extreme ruine of waters wrought strange alterations in the habitations of the earth; as some
hold that the Sea has divided Sicilie from Italie,
Hæc loca vi quandam, et vasta convulsa ruina
Dissiluisse ferunt, cum protinus utraque tellus
Vna foret. -- Virg Æn. iii 414, 416.
Then say, sometimes this land by that forsaken,
And that by this, we re split, and ruine-shaken,
Whereas till then both lands as one were taken.
Cypres from Suria, the Iland of Negroponto from the main land of Beotia, and in other
places joined lands that were sundred by the Sea, filling with mud and sand the chanels
betweene them.
------ sterilisque diu palus aptaque remis
Vicinas urbes alit, et grave sentit aratrum. Hor. Art. Poet. 65.
The fenne long barren, to be row’d in, now
Both feeds the neighbour townes, and feeles the plow.
But there is no great apparence the said Iland should be the new world world we have
lately discovered; for it wellnigh touched Spain, and it were an incredible effect of
inundation to have removed the same more than twelve hundred leagues, as we see it is.
Besides, our modern Navigations have now almost discovered that it is not an Iland, but
rather firme land, and a continent, with the East Indias on one side, and the countries lying
under the two Poles on the other; from which if it be divided, it is with so narrow a strait
and intervall, that it no way deserveth to be named an Iland: For, it seems there are
certain motions in these vast bodies, some natural, and other some febricitant, as well as
in ours. When I consider the impression my river of Dordoigne worketh in my time,
toward the right shoare of her descent, and how much it has gained in twentie years, and
how many foundations of diverse houses it has overwhelmed and violently carried away; I

confesse it to be an extraordinarie agitation: for, should it alwaies keep one course, or
had it ever kept the same, the figure of the world had ere this been overthrowne: But they
are subject to changes and alterations. Sometimes they overflow and spread themselves on
one side, sometimes on another; and other times they containe themselves in their natural
beds or chanels: I speak not of sudden inundations, whereof we now treat the causes. In
Medoc alongst the Sea-coast, my brother the Lord of Arsacke, may see a town of his
buried under the sands, which the sea casteth up before it: The tops of some buildings are
yet to be discerned. His Rents and Demaines have been changed into barren pastures.
The inhabitants thereabouts affirme, that some years since, the Sea encrocheth so much
upon them, that they have lost foure leagues of firme land: These sands are her fore-
runners. And we see great hillocks of gravell moving, which march halfe a league before
it, and usurpe on the firme land. The other testimony of antiquitie, to which some will
refer this discoverie, is in Aristotle (if at least that little book of unheard of wonders be
his) where he reporteth that cortaine Carthaginians having sailed athwart the Atlantike
Sea, without the strait of Gibraltar, after long time, they at last discovered a great fertill
Iland, all replenished with goodly woods, and watred with great and deepe rivers, far
distant from al land, and that both they and others, allured by the goodnes and fertility of
the same, went thither with their wives, children, and household, and there began to
inhabit and settle themselves. The Lords of Carthage seeing their countrie by little and
little to be dispeopled, made a law and express inhibition, that upon pain of death no
more men should go thither, and banished all that were gone thither to dwell, fearing (as
they said) that in success of time, they would so multiply as they might one day supplant
them, and overthrow their own estate. This narration of Aristotle has no reference unto
our new found countries. This servant I had, was a simple and rough-hewen fellow: a
condition fit to yield a true testimony. For, subtile people may indeed marke more
curiously, and observe things more exactly, but they amplifie and glose them: and the
better to persuade, and make their interpretations of more validitie, they cannot chuse but
somewhat alter the story. They never represent things truly, but fashion and maske them
according to the visage they saw them in; and to purchase credit to their judgement, and
draw you on to believe them, they commonly adorn, enlarge, indeed, and hyperbolize the
matter. Wherein is required either a most sincere reporter, or a man so simple, that he
may, have no invention to build upon, and to give a true likelihood unto false devices, and
be not wedded to his own will. Such a one was my man; who besides his own report,
has many times showed me diverse Mariners and Merchants, whom he had known in
that voyage. So am I pleased with his information, that I never enquire what
Cosmographers say of it. We had need of Topographers to make us particular narrations
of the places they have been in. For some of them, if they have the advantage of us, that
they have seen Palestine, will challenge a privilege, to tell us news of all the world
besides. I would have every man write what he knowes, and no more: not only in that, but
in all other subjects. For one may have particular knowledge of the nature of one river,
and experience of the quality of one fountain, that in other things knowes no more than
another man: who nevertheless to publish this little scantling, will undertake to write of
all the Physickes. From which vice proceed diverse great inconveniences. Now to return

to my purpose I find (as far as I have been informed) there is nothing in that nation
that is either barbarous or savage, unless men call that barbarisme which is not common to
them. As indeed, we have no other ayme of truth and reason, than the example and Idea of
the opinions and customs of the countrie we live in. There is ever perfect religion, perfect
policy, perfect and compleat use of all things. They are even savage, as we call those
fruits wild which nature of herself a nd of her ordinary progresse has produced:
whereas indeed, they are those which ourselves have altered by our artificiall devices, and
diverted from their common order, we should rather terme savage. In those are the true
and most profitable vertues, and natural properties most lively and vigorous, which in
these we have bastardized, apphing them to the pleasure of our corrupted taste. And if
notwithstanding, in diverse fruits of those countries that were never tilled, we shall find
that in respect of ours they are most excellent, and as delicate unto our taste; there is no
reason, art should gain the point of honor of our great and puissant mother Nature. We
have so much by our inventions surcharged the beauties and riches of her workes, that we
have altogether overchoaked her: yet where ever her puritie shineth, she makes our vain
and frivolous enterprises wonderfully ashamed.
Et veniunt haderæ sponte sua melius,
Surgit et in solis formsior arbutus antris.
Et volucres nulla dulcius arte canunt.-- Propert. i El. ii. 10.
Ivies spring better of their own accord,
Unhaunted spots much fairer trees afford.
Birds by no art much sweeter notes record.
All our endeavour or wit cannot so much as reach to represent the nest of the least
birdlet, its contexture, beautie, profit and use, no nor the web of a seely spider. All things
(says Plato) are produced either by nature, by fortune, or by art. The greatest and fairest
by one or other of the two first, the least and imperfect by the last. Those nations seem
therefore so barbarous unto me, because they have received very little fashion from
humane wit, and are yet near their originall naturalitie. The laws of nature do yet
command them which are but little bastardized by ours, and that with such puritie, as I am
sometimes grieved the knowledge of it came no sooner to light, at what time there were
men that better than we could have judged of it. I am sorie Lycurgus and Plato had it not:
for me seems that what in those nations we see by experience, does not only exceed all
the pictures wherewith licentious Poesie has proudly imbellished the golden age, and all
her quaint inventions to faine a happy condition of man, but also the conception and desire
of Philosophy. They could not imagine a genuitie so pure and simple as we see it by
experience; nor ever believe our societie might be maintained with so little art and
humane combination. It is a nation, would I answer Plato, that has no kind of traffike,
no knowledge of Letters, no intelligence of numbers, no name of magistrate, nor of
politike superioritie; no use of service, of riches or of povertie; no contracts, no
successions, no partitions, no occupation but idle; no respect of kindred, but common, no

apparell but natural, no manuring of lands, no use of wine, corne, or mettle. The very
words that import lying, falshood, treason, dissimulations, covetousnes, envie, detraction,
and pardon, were never heard of amongst them. How dissonant would he find his
imaginarie common-wealth from this perfection?
Hos natura modos primum dedit.
Nature at first uprise,
These manners did devise.
Furtherrnore, they live in a country of so exceeding pleasant and temperate situation, that
as my testimonies have told me, it is very rare to see a sicke body amongst them; and they
have further assured me, they never saw any man there either shaking with the palsie,
tooth less, with eyes dropping, or crooked and stooping through age. They are seated
along the sea-coast, encompassed toward the land with huge and steepie mountaines,
having betweene both, a hundred leagues or thereabout of open and champaine ground.
They have great abundance of fish and flesh, that have no resemblance at all with ours,
and eat them without any sawces or skill of Cookerie, but plaine boiled or broiled. The
first man that brought a horse thither, althongh he had in many other voyages conversed
with them, bred so great a horror in the land, that before they could take notice of him,
they slew him with arrows. Their buildings are very long, and able to containe two or
three hundred soules, covered with barkes of great trees, fastned in the ground at one end,
enterlaced and joined close together by the tops, after the manner of some of our Granges;
the covering whereof hangs down to the ground, and steadeth them as a flancke. They
have a kind of wood so hard, that ryving and cleaving the same, they make blades,
swords, and gridirons to broile their meat with. Their beds are of a kind of cotten cloth,
fastened to the house roofe, as our ship-cabbanes: everie one has his severall couch for
the women lie from their husbands. They rise with the Sunne, and feed for all day, as
soone as they are up: and make no more meales atter that. They drinke not at meat, as
Suidas reporteth, of some other people of the East, which dranke after meales but drinke
many times a day, and are much given to pledge carowses. Their drinke is made of a
certain root, and of the colour of our Claret wines, which lasteth but two or three days;
they drinke it warme: It has somewhat a sharpe taste, wholesome for the stomack,
nothing heady, but laxative for such as are not used unto it, yet very pleasing to such as
are accustomed unto it. In stead of bread, they use a certain white composition, like unto
Corianders confected. I have eaten some, the taste whereof is somewhat sweet and
wallowish. They spend the whole day in dancing. Their young men go a hunting after
wild beasts with bowes and arroes. Their women busie themselves therewhil’st with
warming of their drinke, which is their chiefest office. Some of their old men, in the
morning before they go to eating, preach in common to all the household, walking from
one end of the house to the other, repeating one self-same sentence many times, till he
have ended his turn (for their buildings are a hundred paces in length) he commends but
two things unto his auditorie. First valor against their enemies, then lovingnesse unto

their wives. They never misse (for their restrainte) to put men in mind of this dutie, that it
is their wives whiche keep their drinke luke-warme and well-seasoned. The form of
their beds, cords, swords blades, and woodden bracelets, wherewith they cover their hand
wrists, when they fight, and great Canes open at one end, by the sound of which they
keep time and cadence in their dancing, are in many places to be seen, and namely in
my own house. They are shaven all over, much more close and cleaner than we are,
with no other Razors than of wood or stone. They believe their soules to be eternall, and
those that have deserved well of their Gods to be placed in that part of heaven where the
Sunne riseth, and the cursed toward the West in opposition. They have certain Prophets
and Priests which commonly abide in the mountaines, and very seldom show themselves
unto the people; but when they come down there is a great feast prepared, and a solemn
assembly of manie towneshipes together (each grange as I have described maketh a
village, and they are about a French league one from another.) The Prophet speaks to the
people in public, exhorting them to embrace virtue, and follow their dutie. All their moral
discipline containeth but these two articles; first an undismaied resolution to war, then
an inviolable affection to their wives. He does also Prognosticate of things to come, and
what success they shall hope for in their enterprises he neither swadeth or disswadeth
them from war but if he chance to misse of his divination, and that it succeed otherwise
than he foretold them, if he be taken, he is hewen in a thousand peeces, and condemned
for a false Prophet. And therefore he that has once misreckoned himself is never seen
again. Divination is the gift of God; the abusing whereof should be a punishable
imposture. When the Divines amongst the Scythians had foretold an untruth, they were
couched along upon hurdles full of heath or brushwood, drawne by oxen, and so manicled
hand and foot, burned to death. Those which manage matters subject to the conduct of
man’s sufficiencie are excusable, although they show the utmost of their skill. But those
that gull and conicatch us with the assurance of an extraordinarie facultie, and which is
beyond our knowledge, ought to be double punished; first because they performe not the
effect of their promise, then for the rashnesse of their imposture and unadvisednesse of
their fraud. They war against the nations that lie beyond their mountaines, to which they
go naked, having no other weapons than bowes or woodden swords, sharpe at one end as
our broaches are. It is an admirable thing to see the constant resolution of their combats,
which never end but by effusion of blood and murther: for they know not what fear or
rowts are. Every Victor brings home the head of the enemy he has slain as a Trophey of
his victory, and fasteneth the same at the entrance of his dwelling place. After they have
long time used and entreated their prisoners well, and with all commodities they can
devise, he that is the Master of them; sommining a great assembly of his acquaintance;
tieth a corde to one of the prisoners arms, by the end whereof he holds him fast, with
some distance from him, for fear he might offend him, and gives the other arm, bound in
like manner, to the dearest friend he has, and both in the presence of all the assembly kill
him with swords: which done, they roast and then eat him in common, and send some
slices of him to such of their friends as are absent. It is not, as some imagine, to nourish
themselves with it (as anciently the Scithians wont to do), but to represent an extreme
and inexpiable revenge. Which we prove thus; some of them perceiving the Portugales,

who had confederated themselves with their adversaries, to use another kind of death
when they took them prisoners; which was, to burie them up to the middle, and against
the upper part of the body to shoot arrows, and then being almost dead, to hang them up;
they supposed, that the people of the other world (as they who had sowed the knowledge
of many vices amongst their neighbors, and were much more cunning in all kindes of
evils and mischief than they) under-took not this manner of revenge without cause, and
that consequently it was more smartfull and cruel than theirs, and thereupon began to
leave their old fashion to follow this. I am not sorie we note the barbarous horror of such
an action, but grieved, that prying so narrowly into their faults we are so blinded in ours. I
think there is more barbarisme in eating men alive, than to feed upon them being dead; to
mangle by tortures and torments a body full of lively sense, to roast him in peeces, and to
make dogs and swine to gnaw and teare him in mammocks (as we have not only read, but
seen very lately, indeed in our own memory, not amongst ancient enemies, but our
neighbors and fellow-citizens; and which is worse, under pretence of pietie and religion)
than to roast and eat him after he is dead. Chrysippus and Zeno, arch-pillars of the Stoice
sect, have supposed that it was no hurt at all in time of need, and to what end soever, to
make use of our carrion bodies, and to feed upon them, as did our forefathers, who being
besieged by Cæsar in the City of Alexia, resolved to sustain the famine of the siege, with
the bodies of old men, women, and other persons unserviceable and unfit to fight.
Vascones (fama est) alimentis talibus usi
Produxere ammas .-- Juven. Sat. xv. 93.
Gascoynes (as fame reports)
Liv’d with meats of such sortes.
And Physitians fear not, in all kindes of compositions availefull to our health, to make
use of it, be it for outward or inward applications. But there was never any opinion found
so unnaturall and immodest, that would excuse treason, treacherie, disloyaltie, tyrannie,
crueltie, and such like, which are our ordinary faults. We may then well call them
barbarous, in regard to reasons rules, but not in respect of us that exceed them in all kindes
of barbarisme. Their wars are noble and generous and have as much excuse and beautie
as this humane infirmitie may admit: they ayme at nought so much, and have no other
foundation amongst them, but the meere jelousie of virtue. They contend not for the
gaining of new lands; for to this day they yet enioy that natural ubertie and fruitfulnesse,
which without labouring toyle, does in such plenteous abundance furnish them with all
necessary things, that they need not enlarge their limits. They are yet in that happy estate
as they desire no more than what their natural necessities direct them: whatsoever is
beyond it, is to them superfluous. Those that are much about one age, do generally enter-
call one another brethren, and such as are younger they call children, and the aged are
esteemed as fathers to all the rest. These leave this full possession of goods in common,
and without division to their heirs, without other claim or title but that which nature does
plainely impart unto all creatures, even as she brings them into the world. If their

neighbors chance to come over the mountaines to assaile or invade them, and that they
get the victory over them, the Victors conquest is glory, and the advantage to be and
remaine superior in valor and virtue: else have they nothing to do with the goods and
spoyles of the vanquished, and so return into their countrie, where they neither want any
necessarie thing, nor lacke this great portion, to know how to enjoy their condition
happily, and are contented with what nature affoordeth them. So do these when their
turn commeth. They require no other ransome of their prisoners, but an
acknowledgement and confession that they are vanquished. And in a whole age, a man
shall not find one that does not rather embrace death, than either by word or countenance
remissely to yield one jot of an invincible courage. There is none seen that would not
rather be slain and devoured, than sue for life, or show any fear. They use their prisoners
with all liberty, thatl they may so much the more hold their lives dear and precious, and
commonly entertaine them with threats of future death, with the torments they shall
endure, with the preparations intended for that purpose, with mangling and slicing of their
members, and with the feast that shall be kept at their charge. All which is done, to wrest
some remisse, and exact some faint yielding speech of submission from them, or to
possesse them with a desire to escape or run away; that so they may have the advantage to
have danted and made them afraid, and to have forced their constancy. For certainly true
victory consisteth in that only point.
------ Victoria nulla est
Quam quæ confessos animo quoque subjugat hostes.
-- Claud. vi. Cons. Hon. Pan. 245.
No conquest such, as to suppresse
Foes hearts, the conquest to confesse.
The Hungarians, a most war-like nation, were whilome wont to pursue their prey Tio
longer than they had forced their enemy to yield unto their mercy. For, having wrested
this confession from him, they set him at liberty without offence or ransome, except it
were to make him sweare never after to bear arms against them. We get many
advantages of our enemies, that are but borrowed and not ours: It is the quality of porterly-
rascall, and not of virtue, to have stronger arms and sturdier legs: Disposition is a dead
and corporall quality. It is a tricke of fortune to make our enemy stoop, and to bleare his
eyes with the Sunnes-light: It is a pranke of skill and knowledge to be cunning in the art of
fencing, and which may happen unto a base and worthelesse man. The reputation and
worth of a man consisteth in his heart and will: therin consists true honor: Constancie is
valor, not of armesand legs but of mind and courage; it consisteth not of the spirit and
courage of our horse, nor of our arms, but in ours. He that obstinately faileth in his
courage, Si succiderit, de genu pugnat. ’If he slip or fall he fights upon his knee.’ He that
in danger of imminent death is no whit danted in his assurednesse; he that in yielding up
his ghost beholding his enemy with a scornefull and fierce looke, he is vanquished, not by
us, but by fortune: he is slain, but not conquered. The most valiant are often the most

unfortunate. So are there triumphant losses in envie of victories. Not those foure sister
victories, the fairest that ever the Sunne beheld with his allseeing eye, of Salamis, of
Plateæ, of Mycale, and of Sicilia, durst ever dare to oppose all their glory together to the
glory of the King Leonidas his discomfiture and of his men, at the passage of
Thermopylæ: what man did ever run with so glorious an envie or more ambitious desire to
the goale of a combat, than Captain Ischolas to an evident loss and overthrow? who so
ingeniously or more politikely did ever assure himself of his welfare than he of his ruine?
he was appointed to defend a certain passage of Peloponesus against the Arcadians,
which finding himself altogether unable to performe, seeing the nature of the place and
inequalitie of the forces, and resolving that whatsoever should present itself unto his
enemy, must necessarily be utterly defeated: On the other side, deeming it unworthy both
his virtue and magnanimity, and the Lacedemonian name, to faile or faint in his charge,
betweene these two extremities he resolved upon a meane and indifferent course, which
was this. The youngest and best-disposed of his troupe he reserved for the service and
defense of their countrie, to which he sent them backe; and with those whose loss was
least, and who might best be spared, he determined to maintaine that passage, and by their
death to force the enemy to purchase the entrance of it as dear as possibly he could; as
indeed it followed. For being suddenly environed round by the Arcadians, after a great
slaughter made of them, both himself and all his were put to the sword. Is any Trophey
assigned for conquerours that is not more duly due unto these conquered? A true conquest
respecteth rather an undanted resolution, an honorable end, than a fair escape, and the
honor of virtue does more consist in combating than in beating. But to return to our
historie, these prisoners, however they are dealt withall, are so far from yielding, that
contrariwise during two or three moneths that they are kept, they ever carry a cheerfull
countenance, and urge their keepers to hasten their trial, they outragiously dote and injure
them. They upbraid them with their cowardlinesse, and with the number of battles they
have lost again theirs. I have a song made by a prisoner, wher ein is this clause, ’Let them
boldly come altogether, and flocks in multitudes, to feed on him; for with him they shall
feed upon their fathers and grandfathers, that heretofore have served his body for food and
nourishment: These muscles,’ says he, ’this flesh, and these veines, are your own; foolish
men as you are, know you not that the substance of your forefathers limbes is yet tied unto
ours? Taste them welle for in them shall you find the relish of your own flesh:’ An
invention, that has no show of barbarisme. Those that paint them dying, and that
represent this action, when they are put to execution, delineate the prisoners spitting in
their executioners faces, and making mowes at them. Verily, so long as breath is in their
body they never cease to brave and defie them, both in speech and countenance. Surely in
respect of us these are very savage men: for either they must be so in good sooth, or we
must be so indeed; There is a wondrous difference betweene their form and ours. Their
men have many wives, and by how much more they are reputed valiant so much the
greater is their number. The manner and beautie of their marriages is wondrous strange
and remarkable: For, the same jealousie our wives have to keep us from the love and
affection of other women, the same have theirs to procure it. Being more careful for their
husbands honor and content than of any thing else, they endeavor and apply all their

industrie to have as many rivals as possibly they can, forasmuch as it is a testimony of
their husbands virtue. Our women would count it a wonder, but it is not so: It is virtue
properly Matrimoniall, but of the highest kind. And in the Bible, Lea, Rachell, Sara, and
Iacobs wives brought their fairest maiden servants into their husbands beds. And Livia
seconded the lustfull appetites of Augustus to her great prejudice. And Stratonica, the wife
of King Dejotarus did not only bring the most beauteous chamber-maide that served her
to her husbands bed, but very carefully brought up the children he begot on her, and by all
possible means aided and furthered them to succeed in their fathers royalty. And least a
man should think that all this is done by a simple and servile or awefull dutie unto their
custom, and by the impression of their ancient customs authority, without discourse or
judgement, and because they are so blockish and dull- spirited, that they can take no other
resolution, it is not amisse we alleage some evidence of their sufficiencie. Besides what I
have said of one of their warlike songs, I have another amorous canzonet, which
beginneth in this sense: ’Adder stay, stay good adder, that my sister may by the patterne of
your partie-coloured coat drawe the fashion and work of a rich lace, for me to give unto
my love; so may your beautie, your nimblenesse or disposition be ever preferred before all
other serpents.’ The first couplet is the burden of the song. I am so conversant with Poesie
that I may judge this invention has no barbarisme at all in it, but is altogether
Anacreontike. Their language is a kind of pleasant speech, and has a pleasing sound,
and some affinitie with the Greeke terminations. Three of that nation, ignorant how dear
the knowledge of our corruptions will one day cost their repose, securitie, and happinesse,
and how their ruine shall proceed from this commerce, which I imagine is already well
advanced (miserable as they are to have suffered themselves to be so cosened by a desire
of new-fangled novelties, and to have quit the calmnesse of their climate to come and see
ours), were at Roane in the time of our late King Charles the ninth, who talked with them
a great while. They were showed our fashions, our pompe, and the form of a fair citie;
afterward some demanded their advice, and would needs know of them what things of
note and admirable they had observed amongst us: they answered three things, the last of
which I have forgotten, and am very sorie for it, the other two I yet remember. They said,
’First they found it very strange that so many tall men with long beards, strong and well
armed, as it were about the Kings person [it is very likely they meant the Switzers of his
guard] would submit themselves to obey a beardlesse child, and that we did not rather
chuse one amongst them to command the rest.’ Secondly (they have a manner of phrase
whereby they call men but a moytie one of another.) ’They had perceived there were men
amongst us full gorged with all sorts of commodities, and others which, hunger- starved
and bare with need and povertie, begged at their gates: and found it strange these moyties
so needy could endure such an injustice, and that they took not the others by the throate,
or set fire on their houses.’ I talked a good while with one of them, but I had so bad an
interpreter, who did so ill apprehend my meaning, and who through his foolishnesse was
so troubled to conceive my imaginations, that I could draw no great matter from him.
Touching that point, wherein I demanded of him what good he received by the superioritie
he had amongst his countriemen (for he was a Captain and our Mariners called him
King), he told me it was to march foremost in any charge of war: further, I asked him

how many men did follow him, he showed me a distance of place, to signifie they were
as many as might be contained in so much round, which I guessed to be about 4 or 5
thousand men: moreover, demanded if when wars were ended, all his authority expired;
he answered, that he had only this left him, which was, that when he went on progresse,
and visited the villages depending of him, the inhabitants prepared paths and high-waies
athwart the hedges of their woods, for him to pass through at ease. All this is not very ill;
but what of that? They weare no kind of breeches nor hosen.



Return to


CHAPTER XXXI: THAT A MAN OUGHT SOBERLY TO MEDDLE WITH JUDGING OF
DIVINE LAWES.






CHAPTER XXXI: THAT A MAN OUGHT SOBERLY TO MEDDLE WITH JUDGING OF
DIVINE LAWES.
HINGS unknown are the true scope of imposture and subject of
Legerdemaine: forasmuch as strangenesse itself does first give credit
unto matters, and not being subject to our ordinary discourses, they
deprive us of means to withstand them. To this purpose, said Plato, ’it
is an easier matter to please, speaking of the nature of the Gods than of
men: For the Auditors ignorance lends a fair and large cariere and free
liberty, to the handling of secret hidden Matters. Whence it followeth
that nothing is so firmly beleeved as that which a man knows least; nor are there people
more assured in their reports than such as tell us fables, as Alchumists, Prognosticators,
Fortune-tellers, Palmesters, Physitians, id genus omne, ’and such like.’ To which, if I durst,
I would join a rable of men that are ordinary interpreters and controulers of Gods secret
desseignes, presuming to find out the causes of every accident, and to prie into the
secrets of Gods divine will, the incomprehensible motives of his works. And howbeit the

continuall varietie and discordance of events drive them from one corner to another, and
from East to West, they will not leave to follow their bowle, and with one small pensill
drawe both white and blacke. There is this commendable observance in a certain Indian
nation, who if they chance to be discomfited in any skirmish or battle, they publikely beg
pardon of the Sunne, who is their God, as for an unjust action, referring their good or ill
fortune to divine reason, submitting their judgement and discourses unto it. It suffiseth a
Christian to believe that all things come from God, to receive them from his divine and
inscrutable wisdom with thanksgiving, and in what manner soever they are sent him, to
take them in good part. But I utterly disalow a common custom amongst us, which is to
ground and establish our religion upon the prosperitie of our interprises. Our beleefe has
other sufficient foundations, and need not be authorized by events. For the people
accustomed to these plausible arguments, and agreeing with his taste, when events sort
contrary and disadvantageous to their expectation, they are in hazard to waver in their
faith. As in the civil wars, wherein we are now for religions sake. those which got the
advantage at the conflict of Rochelabeille, making great joy and bone-fires for that
accident, and using that fortune as an assured approbation of their faction: when afterward
they come to excuse their disaster of Mont-contour and Jarnac, which are scourges and
fatherly chastisements: if they have not a people wholy at their mercy, they will easily
make him perceive what it is to take two kinds of corne out of one sacke: and from one
and the same mouth to blow both hot and cold. It were better to entertaine it with the true
foundations of veritie. It was a notable Sea battle which was lately gained against the
Turkes under the conduct of Don John of Austria. But it has pleased God to make us at
other times both see and feel other such, to our no small loss and detriment. To
conclude, it is no easy matter to reduce divine things unto our balance, so they suffer no
impeachment: And he that would yield a reason why Arrius and Leo his Pope, chief
Principals and main supporters of this heresie, died both at several times of so semblable
and so strange deaths (for being forced through a violent belly-ache to go from their
disputations to their close-stoole, both suddenly yielded up their ghosts on them), and
exaggerate that divine vengeance by the circumstance of the place, might also adde the
death of Heliogabalus unto it, who likewise was slain upon a privie. But what? Ireneus is
found to be engaged in like fortune: Gods intent being to teach us that the good have some
thing else to hope for, and the wicked somewhat else to fear, than the good or bad fortune
of this world: He manageth and applieth them according to his secret disposition: and
depriveth us of the means thereby foolishly to make our profit. And those that according
to humane reason will thereby prevaile do but mocke themselves. They never give one
touch of it, that they receive not two for it. S. Augustine gives a notable trial of it upon
his adversaries. It is a conflict no more decided by the arms of memory than by the
weapons of reason. A man should be satisfied with the light which it pleaseth the Sunne to
communicate unto us by virtue of his beames; and he that shall lift up his eyes to take a
greater within his body, let him not think it strange if for a reward of his over-weening
and arrogancie he loses his sight. Quis hominum potesi scire consiliun Dei? aut quis
poterit cogitare, quid velit dominus?(1 Wisd. ix. 13. ) Who amongst men can know Gods
counsell, or who can think that God will do?




Return to


CHAPTER XXXII: TO AVOID VOLUPTUOUSNESSE IN REGARD OF LIFE






CHAPTER XXXII: TO AVOID VOLUPTUOUSNESSE IN REGARD OF LIFE
HAVE noted the greatest part of ancient opinions to agree in this:
That when our life affords more evil than good, it is then time to die:
and to preserve our life to our torment and incommoditie, is to spurre
and shocke the very rules of nature: as say the old rules.
Ν ζην η θαηνειν ευδαιοως -- Gnom. Græc.
Or live without distresse,
Or die with happinesse.
Καλον το θνησκειν οις υβριν το ζην φερει --Ibid.
Tis good for them to die,
Whom life brings infamie.

Κρεισσν το η ζην εοτιν, η ζην αθλιως -- Soph. Stob. Ser. 118.
’Tis better not to live,
Than wretchedly not thrive.
But to drive off the contempt of death to such a degree as to employ it to distract and
remove himself from honors, riches, greatness, and other goods and favors, which
we call the goods of fortune: as if reason had not enough to do to persuade us to forgoe
and leave them, without adding this new surcharge unto it, I had neither seen the same
commanded nor practised until such time as one place of Seneca came to my hands,
wherein counselling Lucilius (a man mightie and in great authority about the Emperor)
to change this voluptuous and pompous life, and to withdraw himself from this ambition
of the world, to some solitarie, quiet, and philosophicall life: about which Lucilius
alleged some difficulties: ’My advice is’ (says he) ’that either you leave and quit that
life, or your life altogether: But I persuade you to follow the gentler way, and rather to-
untie than breake what you hast so ill knit: alwaies provided you breake it, if you canst
not otherwise untie the same.’ Ihere is no man so base minded that loves not rather to fall
once than ever to remaine in fear of falling. I should have deemed this counsell agreeing
with the Stoices rudenes; But it is more strange it should be borrowed of Epicurus, who
to that purpose writeth consonant to this unto Idomeneus. Yet think I to have noted some
such like thing amongst our own people, but with Christian moderation. Saint Hilarie,
Bishop of Poitiers, a famous enemy of the Arrian heresie, being in Syria, was advertised
that Abra, his only daughter, whom he had left at home with her mother, was by the
greatest Lords of the countrie solicited and sued unto for marriage, as a damosell very
well brought up, fair, rich, and in the prime of her age: he wrote unto her (as we see) that
she should remove her affections from all the pleasures and advantages might be
presented her; for in his voyage he had found a greater and worthier match or husband of
far higher power and magnificence, who should present and endow her with roabes and
jewels of unvaluable price. His purpose was to make her lose the appetite and use of daily
pleasures, and wholly to wed her unto God. Also which, deeming his daughters death, the
shortest and most assured way, he never ceased by vows, prayers and orisons, humbly to
beseech God to take her out of this world, and to call her to his mercy, as it came to
pass; for she deceased soone after his return, whereof he showed manifest tokens of
singular gladnesse. This man seems to endeere himself above others, in that at first
sight he addresseth himself to this meane, which they never embrace but subsidiarily, and
sithence it is towards his only daughter. But I will not omit the success of this story,
although it be not to my purpose. Saint Hilaries wife, having understood by him how her
daughters death succeeded with his intent and will, and how much more happy it was for
her to be dislodged from out this world than still to abide therein, conceived so lively an
apprehension of the eternall and heavenly blessednesse, that with importunate instancie
she solicited her husband to do as much for her. And God, at their earnest entreaty and
joint-common prayers, having soone after taken her unto himself, it was a death
embraced with singular and mutual contentment to both.


Renascence
Editions

Return to


CHAPTER XXXIII: THAT FORTUNE IS OFTENTIMES MET WITHALL IN PURSUIT OF
REASON






CHAPTER XXXIII: THAT FORTUNE IS OFTENTIMES MET WITHALL IN PURSUIT OF
REASON
HE INCONSTANCIE of Fortunes diverse wavering is the cause she
should present us with all sorts of visages. Is there any action of justice
more manifest than this? Cesar Borgia, Duke of Valentinois, having
resolved to Adrian, Cardinall of Cornetto, with whom Pope Alexander
the sixth, his father, and he were to sup that night in Vaticane, sent
certain bottles of empoysoned wine before, and gave his butler great
charge to have a speciall care of it. The Pope coming thither before
his son, and calling for some drinke, the butler supposing the wine had been so
carefully commended unto him for the goodnesse of it, immediately presented some unto
the Pope, who while he was drinking his son came in, and never imagining his bottles
had been touched, took the cup and pledged his father, so that the Pope died presently;
and the son, after he had long time been tormented with sicknesse, recovered to another
worse fortune. It somtimes seems that when we least think on her, she is pleased to
sport with us. The Lord of Estree, then guidon to the Lord of Vandosme, and the Lord of
Liques, Lieutenant to the Duke of Ascot, both servants to the Lord of Foungueselles sister,

albeit of contrary factions (as it happens among neigbouring bordurers) the Lord of Liques
got her to wife: But even upon his wedding day, and which is worse, before his going to
bed, the bridegroome desiring to breake a staffe in favor of his new Bride and Mistris,
went out to skirmish near to Saint Omer where the Lord of Estree being the stronger,
took him prisoner, and to endeare his advantage, the Lady herself was faine,
Conjugis ante coacta novi dimittere collum,
Quam veniens una atque altera rursus heyems.
Noctib us in longis avidum saturraset amorem, --Catul. Ele. iv. 81.
Her new feeres necke forced was she to forgoe,
Ere winters one and two, returning sloe,
In long nights had ful-fil’d
Her love so eager wil’d,
in courtesy, to sue unto him for the deliverie of his prisoner, which he granted; the French
Nobilitie never refusing Ladies any kindness. Seemeth she not to be a right artist?
Constantine, the son of Helen, founded the Empire of Constantinople, and so, many
ages after, Constantine the son of Helen ended the same. She is sometimes pleased to
envie our miracles: we hold an opinion, that King Clovis besieging Angoulesme, the wals
by a divine favor fell of themselves. And Bouchet borroweth of some author, that King
Robert beleagring a City, and leaving secretly stolne away from the siege to Orleans,
there to solemnize the feasts of Saint Aignan, as he was in his earnest devotion, upon a
certain passage of the Masse, the walles of the town, besieged without any battery, fell
flat to the ground. She did altogether contrary in our wars of Milan; for, Captain
Rense, beleagring the City of Eronna for us, and having caused a forcible mine to be
wrought under a great curtine of the walls, by force whereof, it being violently flowne up
from out the ground, did notwithstanding, whole and unbroken, fall so right into his
foundation again, that the besieged found no inconvenience at all by it. She sometimes
playeth the Physitian. Jason Phereus, being utterly forsaken of all Physitians, by reason of
an impostume he had in his breast, and desirous to be rid of it, though it were by death, as
one of the forlorn hope, rusht into a battle amongst the thickest throng of his enemies,
where he was so rightly wounded acrosse the body, that his impostume broke, and he was
cured. Did she not exceed the Painter Protogenes in the skill of his trade? who having
perfected the image of a wearie and panting dog, and in all parts over-tired, to his content,
but being unable, as he desired, lively to represent the drivel or slaver of his mouth, vexed
against his own work, took his spunge, and, moist as it was with diverse colours, threw it
at the picture, with purpose to blot and deface all he had done, fortune did so fitly and
rightly carrie the same towards the dogs chaps that there it perfectly finished what his art
could never attaine unto. Does she not sometimes addres e and correct our counsels?
Isabell Queene of England, being to repasse from Zeland into her Kingdome with an
army, in favor of her son against her husband, had utterly been cast away had she
come unto the port intended, bemg there expected by her enemies; but fortune, against her

will, brought her to another place, where she safely landed. And that ancient fellow, who,
hurling a stone at a dog, misst him, and there withall hit and slew his step-dame, had [he]
not reason to pronounce this verse,
Ταυτοατον ηων καλλιω βονλευται
Chance of itself, than we,
Does better say and see?
Fortune has better advice than we. Icetas had practised and suborned two soldiers to
kill Timoleon, then residing at Adrane in Sicily. They appointed a time to do, as he
should be assisting at some sacrifice; and scattering themselves amongst the multitude, as
they were winking one upon another, to show how they had a very fit opportunity to do
the deed, lo here a third man, that with a huge blow of a sword striketh one of them over
the head, and fels him dead to the ground and so runs away. His fellow, supposing
himself discovered and undone, runs to the altar, suing for sanctuarie, with promise to
confesse the truth even as he was declaring the conspiracie, behold the third man, who had
likewise been taken, whom as a murtherer the people tugged and hauled through the
throng toward Timoleon and the chiefest of the assembly, where he humbly calleth for
mercy, alleging that he had justly murthered the murtherer of his father, whom his good
chance was to find there, averring by good witnesses before them all, that in the City of
the Leontines, his father had been proditoriously slain by him on whom he had now
revenged himseIfe. In neede whereof, because he had been so fortunate in seeking to right
his fathers untimely death, to save the common father of the Sicilians from so imminent a
danger, he had ten Attike mines awarded him. Thus Fortune in her directions exceedeth all
the rules of humane wisdom. But to conclude: is not an express application of her
favor, goodnesse, and singular pietie manifestly discovered in this action? Ignatius, the
Father and the Sonne, both banished by proscription by the Triumvirs of Rome, resolved
on this generous act, to yield their lives one into anothers hands, and therebi frustrate the
tyrants cruelty. They furiously, with their keene rapiers drawne, ran one against another:
Fortune so directed their points that each received his mortal stroke; adding to the honor
of seld-seen an amity, that they had just so much strength left them to draw their armed
and bloudy hands from out their goared wounds, in that plight so fast to embrace and so
hard to claspe one another, that the hangmen were forced, at one stroke and together, to
cut off both their heads; leaving their bodies for ever tied in so honorable a knot, and
their wounds so joined, that they lovingly drew and suckt each others blood, breath, and
life.




Return to


CHAPTER XXXIV: OF A DEFECT IN OUR POLICIES






CHAPTER XXXIV: OF A DEFECT IN OUR POLICIES
Y whilome father, a man who had no helpe but from experience and his
own nature, yet of an unspotted judgement, has heretofore told me,
that he much desired to bring in this custom, which is, that in all cities
there should be a certain appointed place to which, whosoever should
have need of any thing, might come and cause his business to be
registered by some officer appointed for that purpose: As, for example,
if one have pearls to sell, he should say, I seek to sell some pearls: and
another, I seek to buy some pearls. Such a man would faine have companie to travell to
Paris; such a one enquireth for a servant of this or that quality; such a one seeketh for a
master, another a workman; some this, some that; every man as he needed. And it seems
that this means of enter-warning one another would bring no small commoditie into
common commerce and societie; for there are ever conditions that enter-seek one
another, and because they understand not one another, they leave men in great necessities.
I understand, to the infamous reproach of our age, that even in our sight two most
excellent men in knowledge having miserably perished for want of food and other

necessaries: Lilius Gregorius Giraldus in Italy, and Sebastianus Castalio in Germany.
And I verily believe there are many thousands who, had they known or understood their
wants, would sither have sent for them, and with large stipends entertained them, or would
have convaid them succour, where ever they had been. The world is not so generally
corrupted, but I know some that would earnestly wish, and with harty affections desire,
the goods which their forefathers have left them, might, so long as it shall please fortune
they may enjoy them, be emploied for the reliefe of rare and supply of excellent mens
necessitie, and such as for any kind of worth and virtue are remarkable; many of which
are daily seen to be pursued by ill fortune even to the utmost extremity, and that would
take such order for them, as, had they not their ease and content, it might only be imputed
to their want of reason or lacke of discretion. In this economicke or houshold order, my
father had this order, which I can commend, but no way follow: which was, that besides
the day-book of household affairs, wherein are registred at least expenses, paiments,
gifts, bargains and sales, that require not a Notaries hand to them, which book a receiver
had the keeping of: he appointed another journall-book to one of his servants, who was
his clerke, wherein he should insert and orderly set down all accidents worthy of the
noting. and day by day register the memories of the historie of his house: a thing very
pleasant to read when time began to weare out the remembrance of them, and fit for us to
pass the time withall, and to resolve some doubts: when such a work was begun, when
ended, what way or course was taken, what accidents hapned how long it continued; all
our voyages, where, and how long we were from home; our marriages, who died, and
when; the receiving of good or bad tidings, who came, who went, changing or removing
of household officers, taking of new or discharging of old servants, and such like matters.
An ancient custom, and which I would have all men use and bring into fashion again in
their several homes: and I repent my self I have so foolishly neglected the same.



Return to


CHAPTER XXXV: OF THE USE OF APPARELL.






CHAPTER XXXV: OF THE USE OF APPARELL.
HATSOEVER I aime at, I must needs force some of customs
contradictions, so carefully has she barred all our entrances. I was
devising in this chil-cold season whether the fashion of these late
discovered nations to go naked, be a custom forced by the hot
temperature of the air, as we say of the Indians and Moores, or
whether it be an original manner of mankind. Men of understanding,
forasmuch as whatsoever is contained under heaven (as says the Holy
Writ) is subject to the same laws, are wont in such like considerations, where natural
laws are to be distinguished from those invented by man, to have recourse to the general
policy of the world, where nothing that is counterfet can be admitted. Now, all things
being exactly furnished else-whence with all necessaries to maintaine this being, it is not
to be imagined that we alone should be produced in a defective and indigent estate, indeed,
and in such a one as cannot be maintained without forrain helpe. My opinion is, that even
as all plants, trees, living creatures, and whatsoever has life, is naturally seen furnished
with sufficient furmture to defend itself from the injurie of all wethers:

Proptereaque fere res omnes, aut corio sunt,
Aut seta, aut conchis, aut cano, aut cortice tectæ. -- LUCR. iv. 932.
Therefore all things almost we cover’d marke,
With hide, or hair, or shels, or brawne, or barke.
Even so were we. But as those who by an artificiall light extinguish the brightnesse of
the day, we have quenched our proper means by such as we have borrowed. And we may
easily discerne that only custom makes that seem impossible unto us which is not so:
For of those nations that have no knowledge of cloaths, some are found situated under the
same heaven, and climate or parallel, that we are in, and more cold and sharper than ours.
Moreover, the tenderest parts of us are ever bare and naked, as our eyes, face, mouth nose,
and ears; and our country swaines (as our fore, fathers wont) most of them at this day go
bare-breasted down to the navill. Had we been borne needing petticoats and breeches,
there is no doubt but Nature would have armed that which she has left to the batteries of
seasons and fury of wethers with some thicker skin or hide, as she has done our fingers
ends and the soales of our feet. Why seems this hard to be believed? Betweene my
fashion of apparell and that of one of my countrie-clownes, I find much more difference
betweene him and me than betweene his fashion and that of a man who is cloathed but
with his bare skin. How many men (especially in Turkie) go ever naked for devotions
sake? A certain man demanded of one of our loytring rogues whom in the deep of frosty
Winter he saw wandering up and down with nothing but his shirt about him, and yet as
blithe and lusty as anot her that keepes himself muffled and wrapt in wanne furres up to
the ears; how he could have patience to go so. ’And have not you, good Sir’ (answered he)
’your face all bare? Imagine I am all face.’ The Italians report (as far as I remember) of
the Duke of Florence his fool, who when his Lord asked him how, being so ill-clad, he
could endure the cold, which he hardly was able to do himself; to whom the foole
replied: ’Master, use but my receipt and put all the cloaths you have upon you, as I do all
mine; you shall feel no more cold than I do.’ King Massinissa, even in his eldest days,
were it never so cold, so frosty, so stormie, or sharpe wether, could never be induced to
put something on his head, but went alwaies bareheaded. The like is reported of the
Emperor Severus. In the battles that past betweene the Egyptians and the Persians,
Herodotus says, that both himself and diverse others took speciall notice that of such as
lay slain on the ground the Egyptians sculs were without comparison much harder than
the Persians: by reason that these go ever with their heads covered with coifs and turbants,
and those from their infancie ever shaven and bare-headed. And King Agesilaus, even in
his decrepit age, was ever wont to weare his cloaths both Winter and Summer likewise.
Suetonius affirmeth that Cæsar did ever march foremost before his troupes, and most
commonly bare-headed, and on foot, whether the sunne shone or it rained. The like is
reported of Hanniball,
------ tum vertice nudo,

Excipere insanos imbres, cælique ruinam. -- Syl. Ital. 250.
Bare-headed then he did endure,
Heav’ns ruine and mad-raging showre.
A Venetian that has long dwelt amongst them, and who is but lately returned thence,
writeth, that in the Kingdome of Pegu, both men and women, leaving all other parts clad,
go ever bare-footed, indeed, and on horsebacke also. And Plato for the better health and
preservation of the body does earnestly persuade that no man should ever give the feet
and the head other cover than Nature has allotted them. He whom the Polonians chuse for
their King, next to ours who may worthily be esteemed one of the greatest Princes of our
age, does never weare gloves, nor what wether soover it be, winter or summer, other
bonnet abroad than in the warme house. As I cannot endure to go unbuttoned or
untrussed, so the husband-men neighbouring about me would be and feel themselves as
fettered or hand-bound with going so. Varro is of opinion, that when we were appointed to
stand bare headed before the gods or in presence of the Magistrates, it was rather done for
our health, and to enure and arm us against injuries of the wether, than in respect of
reverence. And since we are speaking of cold, and are French-men, accustomed so
strangely to array ourselves in party-coloured sutes (not I, because I seldom weare any
other than blacke or white, in imitation of my father), let us adde this one thing more,
which Captain Martyn du Bellay relateth in the voyage of Luxemburg, where he says to
have seen so hard frosts, that their munition-wines were faine to be cut and broken with
hatchets and wedges, and shared unto the soldiers by weight, which they carried away in
baskets; and Ovid,
Nudaque consistunt formam servantia testæ
Vina, nec hausta meri sed data frusta bibunt. -- Ovid. Trist. iii. El. x. 23.
Bare wines, still keeping form of caske stand fast.
Not gulps, but gobbets of their wine they taste.
The frosts are so hard and sharpe in the emboguing of the Meotis fennes, that in the very
place where Mithridates Lieutenant had delivered a battle to his enemies, on hard ground
and drie-footed, and there defeated them, the next summer he there obtained another sea-
battle against them. The Romanes suffered a great disadvantage in the fight they had with
the Carthaginians near unto Placentia, for so much as they went to their charge with their
blood congealed and limbes benumbed, through extreme cold: whereas Hanniball had
caused many fires to be made throughout his campe, to warme his soldiers by, and a
quantitie of oile to be distributed amongst them, that therewith annointing themselves,
they might make their sinews more supple and nimble, and harden their pores against the
bitter blasts of cold wind which then blew, and nipping piercing of the air. The Greeks
retreat from Babilon into their countrie is renowned by reason of the many difficulties and

encombrances they encountered withall, and were to surmount: whereof this was one, that
in the mountaines of Armenia, being surprised and encircled with so horrible and great
quantitie of snow, that they lost both the knowledge of the countrie and the ways:
wherewith they were so straitly beset that they continued a day and a night without eating
or drinking; and most of their horses and cattell died; of their men a great number also
deceased; many with the glittering and whiteness of the snow were stricken blinde;
diverse through the extremity were lamed, and their limbes shrunken up; many stark stiffe
and frozen with colde, although their senses were yet whole. Alexander saw a nation
where in winter they burie their fruit-bearing trees under the ground, to defend them from
the frost: a thing also used amongst some of our neighbors. Touching the subject of
apparell, the King of Mexico, was wont to change and shift his clothes foure times a day,
and never wore them again, employing his leavings and cast-sutes for his continuall
liberalities and rewards; as also neither pot nor dish, nor any implement of his kitchen or
table were twice brought before him.



Return to


CHAPTER XXXVI: OF CATO THE YOUNGER






CHAPTER XXXVI: OF CATO THE YOUNGER
AM not possessed with this common error, to judge of others
according to what I am my self. I am easy to believe things differing
from my self. Though I be engaged to one form, I do not tie the
world unto it, as every man does. And I believe and conceive a
thousand manners of life, contrary to the common sort: I more easily
admit and receive difference than resemblance in us. I discharge as
much as a man will, another being of my conditions and principles, and simply consider of
it in my self without relation, framing it upon its own modell. Though my self be not
continent, yet do I sincerely commend and allow the continencie of the Capuchins and
Theatines, and highly praise their course of life. I do by imagination insinuate my self
into their place: and by how much more they be other than my self, so much the more
do I love and honor him. I would gladly have every man judged apart, and not be
drawne my self in consequence of others examples. My weaknesse does no way alter the
opinions I should have of the force and vigor of those that deserve it. Sunt, qui nihil
suadent, quam quod se imitari posse confidunt (Cic. Orat. ad Brit.). ’There be such as

advise to nothing but what they trust themselves can imitate.’ Crawling on the face of the
earthe I cease not to marke, even into the clouds, in the imitable height of some heroicke
minds. It is much for me to have a formall and prescript judgement, if the effects be not
so, and at least to maintaine the chief part exempted from corruption. It is something
thing to have a good mind, when my forces faile me. The age we live in (at least our
climate) is so dull and leaden, that not only the execution, but the very imagination of
virtue is far to seek, and seems to be no other thing than a College supposition and a
gibrish word.
------ virtutem verba putant, ut Lucum ligna --Hor. Ep. vi. i. 31.
Vertue seems words to these,
As trees are wood, or woods are trees.
Quam vereri deberent, etia m si percipere non possent. ’Which yet they should reverence,
though they could not reach unto.’ It is an eare-ring or pendant to hang in a cabinet, or at
the tongues end, as well as at an eare for an ornament. There are no more vertuous actions
known; those that bear a show of virtue have no essence of it: for profit, glory,
custom, fear, and other like strange causes direct us to produce them. Justice, valor,
integritie, which we then exercise, may by others consideration, and by the countenance
they publikly bear, be termed so: but with the true workman it is no virtue at all. There is
another end proposed; another efficient cause. Vertue alloweth of nothing but what is
done by her, and for her alone. In that great battle at Potidæa which the Greeks under
Pausanias gained of Mardonius and the Persians, the victors following their custom,
coming to share the glory and prise of the victory betweene them, ascribed the pre-
excellencie of valor in that conflict to the Spartane nation. The Spartines, impartiall
Judges of virtue, when they came to decide to what particular man of their countrie the
honor to have done best in that day should of right belong, they found that Aristodemus
had most courageously engaged and hazarded himself: Yet gave him not the prise of
honor of it, because his virtue had been therunto incited by an earnest desire to purge
himself from the reproch and infamie which he had incurred in the action at
Thermopyles, and from all daring ambition to die courageously, thereby to warrant his
former imputation. Our judgements are yet sicke, and follow the depravations of our
customs. I see the greatest part of our spirits to affect wit, and to show themselves
ingenious, by obscuring and detracting from the glory of famous and general ancient
actions, giving them some base and malicious interpetation, fondly and enviously
charging them with vain causes and frivolous occasions. A subtill invention no doubt.
Let any man present me with the most excellent and blameless action, and I will oppose it
with fiftie vicious and bad intentions, all which shall carrie a face of likelihood. God
knowes (to him that will extend them) what diversitie of images our internal will does
suffer: They do not so maliciously as grosely and rudely endeavour to be ingenious with
all their railing and detraction. The same pain a man taketh to detract from these noble
and famous names, and the very same liberty would I as willingly take to lend them my

shoulders to extoll and magnifie them. I would endeavor to charge these rare and choise
figures, selected by the consent of wise men for the worlds examples as much and as high
as my invention would give me leave with honor, in a plausible interpretation and
favourable circumstance. And a man must think that the diligent labours of our invention
are far beyond their merit. It is the part of honest minded men to portray virtue as fair
as possible fair may be. A thing which would no whit be mis- seeming or undecent, if
passion should transport us to the favor and pursuit of so sacred formes, what these do
contrary, they either do it through malice or knaverie, with purpose to reduce and sute
their beleefe to their capacitie whereof I lately spake; or rather, as I think, because their
sight is not of sufficient power or clearnes, nor addressed to conceive or apprehend the
far-shining brightnes of virtue in natural and genuine puritie: as Plutarke says, that in
his time some imputed the cause of Cato the youngers death to the fear he had conceived
of Cesar: whereat he has some reason to be moved: by which a man may judge how
much more he would have been offended with those that have ascribed the same unto
ambition. Oh foolish people! He would no doubt have performed a fair action, so
generous and so just, rather with ignominie than for glory. This man was truly a patterne
whom nature chose to show how far humane virtue may reach, and mans constancy
attaine unto. But my purpose is not here to treat this rich argument: I will only confront
together the sayings of five Latin Poets upon Catoes commendations, and for the interest
of Cato, and by incidencie for theirs also. Now ought a gentleman, well-bred, in respect of
others, find the two former somewhat languish ing; the third more vigorous, but
suppressed by the extravagancie of force. He will judge there were yet place for one or
two degrees of invention, to reach unto the fourth, in consideration of which he will
through admiration join hands for the last (yet first in some degree and space, but which
space he will sweare can by no humane spirit be filled up) he will be much amazed, he
will be much amated. Lo, here are wonders, we have more Poets than judges and
interpreters of poesie. It is an easier matter to frame it than to know it: Being base and
humble, it may be judged by the precepts and art of it: But the good and loftie, the
supreme and divine, is beyond rules and above reason. Whosoever discerneth her beautie,
with a constant, quick- seeing, and setled looke, he can no more see and comprehend the
same than the splendor of a lightning flash. It has no communitie with our judgement; but
ransacketh and ravisheth the same. The fury which prickes and moves him that can
penetrate h er, does also stricke and wound a third man, if he hear it either handled or
recited, as the adamant stone draws not only a needle, but infuseth some of her facultie in
the same to draw others: And it is more apparently seen in theaters, that the sacred
inspiration of the Muses, having first stirred up the Poet with a kind of agitation unto
choler, unto grief, unto hatred, indeed beyond himself, whither and however they
please, does also by the Poet strike and enter into the Actor, and consequently by the
Actor a whole auditorie or multitude. It is the ligament of our senses depending one of
another. Even from my infancie Poesie has had the virtue to transpierce and transport
me. But that lively and feeling-movino that is naturally in me have diversly been
handled, by the diversitie of forms, not so much higher or lower (for they were ever the
highest in every kind) as different in colour. First a blithe and ingenious fluiditie, then a

quaint-wittie and loftie conceit. To conclude, a ripe and constant force. Ovid, Lucan, and
Virgil will better declare it. But here our Gallants are in their full cariere.
Sit Cato dum vivit sane vel Cæsare major. -- Mart. Epig. xxxii. 5.
Let Cato Junior, while he
does live, greater than Cæsar be.
Saith one.
------ et invictum devicta morte Catonem: --Manil. Astr. iv. 87.
Cato unconquered, death being vanquished.
Saith another: And the third, speaking of the civill wars betweene Cæsar and Pompey.
Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni. -- Lucan. Bel. Civ. i. 127.
The cause that overcame with Gods was greater;
But the cause overcome pleased Cato better.
And the fourth upon Cæsars commendations:
Et cuncta terrarum subacta,
Præter atrocem animum Catonis. -- Hor. ii. Od. i. 23.
Of all the earth all parts enthralled,
Catoes mind only unappalled.
And the harps-master, after he has installed the names of the greatest Romans in his
picture, ended thus:
----- -his dantem jura Catonem. --Virg. Æn. viii. 670.
Chiefe justice Cato do decree
Lawes that for righteous soules should be.




Return to


CHAPTER XXXVII: HOW WE WEEPE AND LAUGH AT ONE SELFE-SAME THING






CHAPTER XXXVII: HOW WE WEEPE AND LAUGH AT ONE SELFE-SAME THING
HEN we read in Histories (Plut. Vit. Pyrrh. f.), that Antigonus was
highly displeased with his son, at what time he presented unto him
the head of King Pirrhus his enemy, slain but a little before in fight
against him which he no sooner saw but he burst foorth a weeping: And
that Renate Duke of Loraine wept for the death of Charles Duke of
Burgundie, whom he had eftsoones discomfited, and was as an
assistant mourner at his funeralls: And that in the battle of Anroy
(which the Earl of Montfort had gained against the faction of Charles de Blois, for the
Dutchy of Britanie) the victorious conqueror met with the body of his enemy deceased,
mourned very grievously for him; a man must not suddenly exclaime.
E cosi avven che l’animo ciascuna
Sua passion sotto ’l contrario manto
Ricopre, con la vista hor’ chiara, hor’ bruna.

So happens it, the mind covers each passion
Under a cloake of colours opposite,
To sight now clear, now darke, in diverse fashion.
When Cæsar was presented with Pompeis head, Histories report that he turned his looks
aside, as from a ghastly and unpleasing spectacle. There has been so long a
correspondence in societie in the managing of public affairs, mutually betweene them,
such a community of fortunes, so many reciprocall offices and bonds of alliance, that a
man cannot think his countenance to have been forced, false, and wily, as this other
supposeth.
-----tutumque putavit
Jam bonus esse socer, lacrymas non sponte cadentes
Effudit gemitusque expressit pectore læto. Lucan. ix.1040.
Now to be kind indeed he did not doubt
Father in law, tears, which came hardly out
He shed, and grones exprest
From inward pleased brest.
For certainly, howbeit the greatest number of our actions be but masked and painted
over with dissimulation, and that it may sometimes be true,
Hæredis fletus sub persona risus est. -- Aul. Gell. Noct. Att. xvii. c. 14.
The weeping of an heir is laughing under a visard or disguise.
Yet must a man consider, by judging of his accidents, how our mindes are often agitated
by diverse passions; For (as they say) there is a certain assembly of diverse humors in our
bodies, whereof she is sovereign mistris, who most ordinarily, according to our
complexions, does command us: so in our mind, although it containe severall motions
that agitate the same, yet must one chiefly be predominant. But it is not with so full an
advantage, but for the volubilitie and supplenesse of our mind, the weakest may by
occasion reobtaine the place again, and when their turn cometh, make a new charge;
whence we see not only children, who simply and naturally follow nature, often to weepe
and laugh at one self-same thing, but none of us all can vaunt himself, what wished for
or pleasant voyage soever he undertake, but that taking leave of his family and friends, he
shall feel a chilling and panting of the heart, and if he shed not tears, at least he puts his
foot in the stirrup with a sad and heavy cheere. And what gentle flame soever does warme
the heart of young virgins, yet are they hardly drawne to leave and forgoe their mothers, to
betake them to their husbands: whatsoever this good fellow say:

Est ne novis nuptis odio Venus, anne parentum
Frustrantur falsis gaudia lacrymulis,
Ubertum thalami quas intra limina fundunt?
Non, ita me Divi, vera gemunt, juverint. -- Catul. Eleg. ii.15.
Doe young birds hate indeed fresh Venus toyes,
Or with false tears delude their parents joyes,
Which in their chambers they powre out amaine?
So helpe me God they do not true complain.
So is it not strange to mourne for him dead, whom a man by no means would have alive
again. When I chide my boy, I do it with the best heart I have: They are true and not
feigned imprecations: but that fit past over, let him have need of me, I will gladly, do him
all the good I can and by and by I turn over another leafe. If I chance to call one knave or
asse, my purpose is not for ever to enfeoffe him with those nick-names; nor do I think to
say, tong you liest, if immediately after I call him an honest man. No quality does
embrace us purely and universally. If it were not the countenance of a foole to speak
alone or to him self, there would scarce be day or hour wherein some body should not
hear me mutter and grumble to my self, and against my self, A ( ) in the fooles teeth!
yet do not I think it to be my definition. He that seeth me sometimes to cast a frowning
looke upon my wife, or sometimes a loving countenance, and thinkes that either of them is
but feigned, he is a foole. Nero taking leave of his mother, whom he sent to be drowned,
felt notwithstanding the emotion of that motherly farewell, and at one instant was strucken
with horror and pity. It is said that the Sunnes-light is not of one continued piece, but that
it so uncessantly and without intermission does cast so thicke new raies, one in the necke
of another, upon us, that we cannot perceive the space betweene them.
Largus enim liquidi-fons luminis æthereus sol,
Irrigat assidue cælum candore recenti,
Suppeditaque novo confestim lumine lumen. -- Lucr. v. 281.
Heav’ns Sunne the plenteous spring of liquid light
Still heav’n bedewes with splendor fresh and bright,
Still light supplies with light of fresher sight.
So does our mind cast her points diversly and impercepubly. Artabanus surprised
Xerxes his nephew, and chid him for the sudden changing of his countenance. He was to
consider the unmeasurable greatness of his forces at the passage of Hellespont, for the
enterprise of Greece. First he was suddenly assailed by an excessive joy, to see so many
thousands of men at his service, and witnessed the same by the alacritie and cheerefulnes
of his countenance: And immediately at that very moment, his thoughts suggesting how
so many lives were to be consumed, and should come to nothing (at the furthest, within

one age), he gan to frowne his browes, and grew so pensive that he wept. We have with a
resolute and inexorable mind pursued the revenge of an injurie, and felt a singular
content for the victory; yet upon better advice do we weepe: it is not that we weepe for:
the thing is as it was, there is nothing changed: But that our mind beholds the thing with
another eye, and under another shape, it presents itself unto us. For every thing has diverse
faces, sundry byases, and severall lustres. Aliance, kinred, old acquaintances, and long
friendship seize on our imagination, and at that instant passionate the same according to
their quality, but the turn or change of it is so violent that it escapes us.
Nil adeo fieri celeri ratione videtur,
Quam si mens fieri proponit et inchoat ipsa.
Ocius ergo animus quam res se perciet ulla,
Ante quarum in promptu natura videtur. -- Lucr. iii. 183.
Nothing in so quick sort seems to be done,
As mind set on a thing, and once begun,
The mind that swifter stirres before our eyes,
Than any thing, whose form we soone comprize.
And therefore, intending to continue one body of all this pursuit, we deceive ourselves.
When Timoleon weepeth the murther he has perpetrated with so mature and generous a
determmation, he weepeth not for the liberty restored to his countrie, nor the tyrant, but
he weepeth for his brother. One part of his dutie is acted, let us permit him to play the
other.



Return to


CHAPTER XXXVIII: OF SOLITARINESSE






CHAPTER XXXVIII: OF SOLITARINESSE
ET us leave apart this outworne comparison, betweene a solitarie and
an active life: And touching that goodly saying under which ambition
and avance shroud themselves, that we are not borne for our particular,
but for the public good: let us boldly refer ourselves to those that are
engaged and let them beat their conscience, if on the contrary the
states, the charges, and this trash of the world are not rather sought and
sued for to draw a private commoditie from the public. The bad and indirect means
whereth rough in our age men canvase and toyle to attaine the same, do manifestly
declare the end thereof to be of no great consequence. Let us answer ambition, that
herself gives us the taste of solitarinesse. For what does she shun so much as company?
What seeketh she more than elbow-roome? There is no place but there are means and
waies to do well or ill. Nevertheless if the saying of Bias be true, ’That the worst part is
the greatest:’ Or that which Ecclesiastes says, ’That of a thousand there is not one good:’
Rari quippe boni: numero vix sunt totidem, quot
Thebarum portæ, vel divitis ostia Nili: -- Juven. Sat. xiii. 26.
1 Good men are rare, so many scarce (I fear)

As gates of Thebes, mouths of rich Nilus were.
Contagion is very dangerous in a throng. A man must imitate the vicious, or hate them:
both are dangerous: for to resemble them is perilous, because they are many , and to hate
many is hazardous, because they are dissemblable, and Merchants that travell by sea have
reason to take heed that those which go in the same ship be not dissolute, blasphemers,
and wicked, judging such company unfortunate. Therefore Bias said pleasantly to those
that together with him passt the danger of a great storme, and called to the Gods for helpe:
’Peace, my masters, lest they should hear that you are here with me.’ And of a more
militarie example, Albuberque, Viceroy in India for Emanuel King of Portugall, in an
extreme danger of a sea-tempest, took a young boy upon his shoulders, for this only end,
that in the common perill his innocence might be his warrant and recommending to Gods
favor to set him on shore: yet may a wise man live every where contented, indeed alone,
in the throng of a Pallace: but if he may chuse, he will (says he) avoid the sight of it. If
need require, he will endure the first: but if he may have his choice, he will chuse the
latter. He thinks he has not sufficiently rid himself from vices if he must also contest
with other mens faults. Charondas punished those for wicked that were convicted to have
frequented lewd companies. There is nothing so dis-sociable and sociable as man, the one
for his vice, the other for his nature. And I think Antisthenes did not satisfie him that
upbraided him with his conversation with the wicked, saying, ’That Physicians live
amongst the sicke:’ Who if they stead sicke mens healths, they impaire their own by the
infection, continuall visiting, touching, and frequenting of diseases. Now (as I suppose)
the end is both one, thereby to live more at leisure and better at ease. But man does not
alwaies seek the best way to come unto it, who often supposeth to have quit affairs
when he has but changed them. There is not much less vexation in the government of a
private family than in the managing of an entire state: wherever the mind is busied,
there it is all. And though domesticall occupations be less important, they are as
importunate. Moreover, though we have freed ourselves from the court and from the
market, we are not free from the principal torments of our life.
----- ratio et prudentia curas,
Non locus effusi late maris arbiter aufert. -- Hor. i. Epist. xi. 25.
Reason and wisdom may set cares aside.
Not place the Arbiter of seas so wide.
Shift we or change we places never so often, ambition, avar ice, irresolution, fear, and
concupiscences never leave us.
Et post equitem sedet atra cura. -- Hor. iii. Od. i. 39.
Care, looking grim and blacke, does sit
Behind his backe that rides from it.

They often follow us, even into immured cloisters. and into schooles of philosophy; nor
do hollow rocks, nor wearing of hair-shirts, nor continuall fastings, rid us from them.
Hæret lateri lethalis arundo. -- Virg. Æn. iv. 73.
The shaft that death implide
Sticks by the flying side.
It was told Socrates that one was no whit amended by his travell: ’I believe it well (said he)
for he carried himself with him.’
Quid terras alio calentes
Sole mutamus? patria quis exul
Se quoque fugit? -- Hor. ii. Od. xvi. 18.
Why change we soyles warm’d with another Sunne?
Who from home banisht has himself outrunne?
If a man do not first discharge both himself and his mind from the burden that
presseth her, removing from place to place will stir and press her the more, I as in a
ship, wares well stowed and closely piled take up least roome, you do a sicke-man more
hurt than good to make him change place, you settle an evil in removing the same; as
stakes or poles, the more they are stirred and shaken, the faster they sticke, and sinke
deeper into the ground. Therefore is it not enough for a man to have sequestered himself
from the concourse of people: is it not sufficient to shift place, a man must also sever
himself from the popular conditions that are in us. A man must sequester and recover
himself from himself.
-----rupi jam vincula, dicas,
Nam luctata canis nodum arripit, attamen illa
Cum fugit, a collo trahitur pars longa catenæ. -- Pers. Sat. v. 158.
You will say perhaps I my bonds have quit,
Why so the striving dog the knot has bit;
Yet when he flies, much chaine does follow it.
We carry our fetters with us: is it not all absolute liberty; we still cast backe our looks
towards that we have left behinde: our mind does still run on it; our fancie is full of it.
----- nisi purgatum est pectus, quæm prælia nobis
Atque pericula tunc ingratis insinuandum?

Quantæ conscindunt hominem cupidinis actes
Solicitum curæ, quantique perinde timores?
Quidve superbia, spurcidia ac petulantia, quantas
Efficiunt clades, quid luxus, desidiesque? -- Lucr. v. 44.
Unless our breast be purg’d, what wars must we
What perils then, though much displeased, see?
How great tears, how great cares of sharpe desire
Doe careful man distract, torment, enfire?
Uncleannesse, wantonnesse, sloth, riot, pride,
How great calamities have these implide?
Our evil is rooted in our mind: and it cannot scape from itself.
In culpa est animus, qui se non effugit unquam, -- Hor. i. Epist. xiv. 13.
The mind in greatest fault must lie
Which from itself can never flie,
Therefore must it be reduced and brought into itself: It is the true solitarinesse, and
which may be enjoyed even in the frequencie of peopled Cities and Kings courts; but it is
more commodiously enjoyed apart. Now sithence we undertake to live solitarie, and
without companie, let us cause our contentment to depend of ourselves: Let us shake off
all bonds that tie us unto others: Gaine we that victory over us, that in good earnest we
may live solitarie, and therein live at our ease. Stilphon having escaped the combustion of
his City, wherein he had lost both wife and children, and all his goods; Demetrius
Poliorcetes seeing him in so great a ruine of his Countrie with an unaffrighted
countenance, demanded of him, whether he had received any loss: He answered, No: and
that (thanks given to God) he had lost nothing of his own. It is that which Antisthenes the
Philosopher said very pleasantly, ’That man ought to provide himself with munitions that
might float upon the water, and by swimming escape the danger of shipwracke with him.’
Verily, ’a man of understanding has lost nothing if he yet have himself.’ When the City
of Nola was over-run by the Barbarians, Paulinus, bishop thereof, having lost all he had
there, and being their prisoner, prayed thus unto God: ’O Lord, deliver me from feeling of
this loss: for you knowest as yet they have touched nothing that is mine.’ The riches that
made him rich, and the goods which made him good, were yet absolutely whole. Behold
what it is to chuse treasures well, that may be freed from injurie; and to hide them in a
place where no man may enter, and which cannot be betraied but by ourselves. A man
that is able may have wives, children, goods, and chiefly health, but not so tie himself
unto them that his felicitie depend on them. We should reserve a store-house for our
selves, what need soever change; altogether ours, and wholly free, wherein we may hoard
up and establish our true liberty, and principal retreit and solitarinesse, wherein we must
go alone to ourselves, take out ordinary entertainment, and so privateIy that no acquai

ntance or communication of any strange thing may therein find place: there to discourse,
to meditate and laugh, as, without wife, without children, and goods, without traine or
servants; that if by any occasion they be lost, it seem not strange to us to pass it over;
we have a mind moving and turning in itself; it may keep itself companie; it has
wherewith to offend and defend, wherewith to receive, and wherewith to give. Let us not
fear that we shall faint and droop through tedious and mind-trying idlenesse in this
solitarinesse.
In solis sis tibi turba locis.
Be you, when with you is not any,
As good unto your self as many.
Vertue is contented with itself, without discipline, without words, and without effects. In
our accustomed actions, of a thousand there is not one found that regards us: he whom
you seest so furiously, and as it were besides himself, to clamber or crawle up the citie
wals or breach, as a point-blank to a whole voly of shot, and another all wounded and
skarred, crazed and faint, and well-nie hunger-starven, resolved rather to die than to open
his enemy the gate and give him entrance; doest you think he is there for himself? No
verily. It is perhaps for such a one whom neither he nor so many of his fellowes ever
saw, and who perhaps takes no care at all for them; but is therewhilst wallowing up to the
ears in sensualitie, slouth, and all manner of carnal delights . This man, whom about mid-
night, when others take their rest, you seest come out of his study, meagre looking, with
eyes trilling, flegmatick, squalide, and spauling, doest you think that plodding on his
books does seek how he shall become an honester man, or more wise, or more content?
There is no such matter. He wil either die in his pursuit, or teach posterity the measure of
Plautus verses and the true orthography of a Latine word. Who does not willingly chop
and counterchange his health, his ease, indeed his life, for glory and for reputation? The
most unprofitable, vain, and counterfet coine, that is in use with us. Our death is not
sufficient to make us afraid; let us also charge ourselves with that of our wives, of our
children, and of our friends and people. Our own affairs do not sufficiently trouble and
vexe us: Let us also drudge, toile, vex, and torment ourselves with our neighbors and
friends matters.
Vah quemquamne hominem in animum instituere, aut
Parare, quod sit charius, quam ipse est sibi? -- Ter. Adel. act. i. scen. i. 13.
Fie, that a man should cast, that ought, than he
Himselfe of himself more belov’d should be.
Solitarinesse, me seems, has more apparence and reason in those which have given
their most active and flourishing age into the world, in imitation of of Thales. We have

lived long enough for others, live we the remainder of our life unto ourselves: let us bring
home our cogitations and inventions unto ourselves and unto our ease. It is no easy
matter to make a safe retreit: it does over-much trouble us with joyning other enterprises
unto it; since God gives us leisure to dispose of our dislodging. Let us prepare ourselves
unto it, packe we up our baggage. Let us betimes bid our companie farewell. Shake we
off these violent holdfasts which else-where engage us, and estrange us from ourselves.
These so strong bonds must be untied, and a man must eft-soones love this or that, but
wed nothing but himself; That is to say, let the rest be our own: yet not so combined and
glued together that it may not be sundred without fleaing us, and therewithall pull away
some peece of our own. The greatest thing of the world is for a man to know how to be
his own. It is high time to shake off societie, since we can bring nothing to it. And he that
cannot lend, let him take heed of borrowing. Our forces faile us: retire we them, and shut
them up into ourselves. He that can suppresse and confound in himself the offices of so
many amities, and of the company, let him do it. In this fall which makes us inutile,
irkesome, and importunate to others, let him take heed he be not importunate, irkesome,
and unprofitable to himself. Let him flatter court, and cherish himself, and above all let
him governe him self, respecting his reason and fearing his conscience, so that he may
not without shame stumble or trip in their presence. Rarum est enim, ut satis se quisque
vereatur: ’For it is a rare matter that every man sufficiently should stand in awe and
reverence of himself.’ Socrates says, ’That young men ought to be instructed, and men
exercised in well doing; and old men withdraw themselves from all civill and military
negotiations, living at their own discretion, without obligation to any certain office.’
There are some complexions more proper for these precepts of retreit than orhers. Those
which have a tender and demiss apprehension, a squemish affection, a delicate will, and
which cannot easily subject or employ itself (of which both by natural condition and
propense discourse I am one) wil better apply themselves unto this counsell than active
minds and busie spirits; which imbrace all, ever where engage, and in all things passionate
themselves, that offer, that present and yield themselves to all occasions. A man must
make use of all these accidentall commodities, and which are without us, so long as they
be pleasing to us; but not make them our principal foundation: It is not so; nor reason, nor
nature permit it. Why should we against their laws subject our contentment to the power
of others? Moreover, to anticipate the accidents of fortune, for a man to deprive himself
of the commodities he has in possession, as many have done for devotion, and some
Philosophers by discourse; to serve themselves, to lie upon the hard ground, to pull out
their own eyes, to cast their riches into the sea, to seek for pain and smart (some by
tormenting this life for the happinesse of another; othersome placing themselves on the
lowest step, thereby to warrant themselves from a new fall) is the action of an excessive
virtue. Let sterner and more vigorous complexions make their lurking glorious and
exemplar.
------ tuta et parvula laudo,
Cum res deficiunt, satis inter vilia fortis:
Verum ubi quid melius contingit et unctius, idem

Hos sapere, et solos aio bene vivere, quorum
Conspicitur nitidis fundata pecunia villis. -- Hor. i. Epist. xv. 42.
When riches faile, I praise the safe estate,
Though small; base things do not high thoughts abate.
But when tis better, finer with me, I
They only live well, and are wise, do crie,
Whose corne in fair farmes does well-grounded lie.
There is work enough for me to do without going so far. It sufficeth me, under
fortunes favor, to prepare my self for her disfavour; and being at ease, as far as
imagination may attaine unto, so represent the evil to come unto my self: Even as we
enure ourselves to Tilts and Tourneyes, and counterfeit war in time of peace. I esteeme
not Arcesilaus the Philosopher less reformed because I know him to have used household
implements of gold and silver, according as the condition of his fortune gave him leave. I
rather value him the more than if he had not done it, forasmuch as he both moderately and
liberally made use of them. I know unto what limits natural necessitie goeth; and I
consider a poore almesman begging at my doore to be often more plump-cheekt, in better
health and liking, than I am: Then do I enter into his estate, and essay to frame and sute
my mind unto his byase. And so over-running other examples, albeit I imagine death,
povertie, contempt, and sicknesse to be at my heels, I easily resolve my self not to
apprehend any fear of that which one of less worth than my self does tolerate and
undergoe with such patience: And I cannot believe that the basenesse or shallownesse of
understanding can do more than vigor and far-seeing, or that the effects and reason of
discretion cannot reach to the effects of custom and use. And knowing what slender hold-
fast these accessorie commodities have, I omit not in full jovyssance of them, humbly to
beseech God of his mercy (as a sovereign request) to make me contented with my self,
and with the goods proceeding from me. I see some gallantly-disposed young men, who
notwithstanding their fair-seeming show, have boxes full of pils in their coffers at home,
to take when the rhume shall assaile them; which so much the less the fear, when they
think the remedy to be at hand. So must a man do: as also if he feel himself subject to
some greater infirmitie, to store himself with medicaments that may assuage, supple, and
stupifie the part grieved. The occupation a man should chuse for such a life must neither
be painfull nor tedious, otherwise in vain should we accompt to have sought our abiding
there, which depends from the particular taste of every man. Mine does no way
accommodate itself to husbandrie. Those that love it, must with moderation apply
themselves unto it.
Conentur sibi res, non se submittere rebus. -- Epist. i. 19.
Endevour they things to them to submit,
Not them to things (if they have Horace wit)

Husbandrie is otherwise a servile office, as Salust termeth it: It has more excusable
parts, as the care of gardening, which Xenophon ascribeth to Cyrus: A meane or
mediocritie may be found betweene this base and vile carking care, extended and full of
toiling labor, which we see in men that wholly plunge themselves therein, and that
profound and extreme retchlesnesse to let all things go at six and seven, which is seen in
others.
------ Democriti pecus edit agellos
Cultague, dum peregre est animus sine corpore velox. -- Epist. xii. 12.
Cattle destroyd Democritus his sets,
While his mind bodilesse vagaries fets.
But let us hear the counsell which Plinie the younger gives to his friend Cornelius
Rufus, touching this point of Solitarinesse: ’I persuade you in this full-gorged and fat
retreit wherein you are, to remit this base and abject care of husbandrie unto your
servants, and give your self to the study of letters, whence you maist gather something
that may altogether be thine own.’ He meaneth reputation: like unto Ciceroes humor,
who says, That he will employ his solitarinesse and residence from public affairs to
purchase unto himself by his writings an immortall life.
------ usque adeone
Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter?-- Pers. Sat. i. 27.
Is it then nothing worth that you doest know.
Unless what you doest know, you others show? It seemth to be reason, when a man
speaks to withdraw himself from the world, that one should looke beyond him. These
do it but by halfes. Indeed they set their match against the time they shall be no more; but
pretend to reap the fruit of their dessignes, when they shall be absent from the world, by a
ridiculous contradiction. The imagination of those who through devotion seek
solitarinesse, filling their minds with the certaintie of heavenly promises, in the other life,
is much more soundly consorted. They propose God as an object infinit in goodnesse and
incomprehensible in power, unto themselves. The soul has therein, in all free liberty,
wherewith to glut herself. Afflictions and sorrowes redound to their profit, being
imployed for the purchase and attaining of health and eternall gladnesse. Death, according
to ones wish, is a passage to so perfect an estate. The sharpnesse of their rules is presently
made smooth and easy by custom; and carnall concupiscences rejected, abated, and
lulled asleep by refusing them: for nothing entertaineth them but use and exercise. This
only end of another life, blessedly immortall, does rightly merit we should abandon the
pleasures and commodities of this our life. And he that can enlighten his soul with the
flame of a lively faith and hope, really and constantly, in his solitarinesse does build unto

himself a voluptuous and delicious life, far surmounting all other lives. Therefore does
neither the end nor middle of this counsell please me. We are ever falling into a relaps
from an ague to a burning fever. This plodding occupation of bookes is as painfull as any
other, and as great an enemy unto health, which ought principally to be considered. And a
man should not suffer himself to be inveagled by the pleasure he takes in them: It is the
same pleasure that loses the thriving husband-man, the greedy-covetous, the sinning-
voluptuous, and the puft-up ambitious. The wisest men teach us sufficiently to beware and
shield us from the treasons of our appetites, and to discerne true and perfect pleasures
from delights blended and entermingled with more pain. For most pleasures (say they)
tickle, fawne upon, and embrace us, with purpose to strangle us, as did the theeves whom
the Egyptians termed Philistas: And if the head-ach would seize upon us before
drunkennesse, we would then beware of too much drinking: but sensualitie, the better to
entrap us, marcheth before, and hideth her tracke from us. Bookes are delightfull, but if by
continuall frequenting them, we in the end lose both health and cheerefulnesse (our best
parts) let us leave them. I am one of those who think their fruit can no way countervaile
this loss. As men that have long time felt themselves enfeebled through some
indisposition, do in the end yield to the mercy of Physicke, and by art have certain
rules of life prescribed them, which they will not transgresse: So he that withdrawes
himself, as digested and over-tired with the common life, ought likewise to frame and
prescribe this unto the rules of reason; direct and range the same by premeditation and
discourse. He must bid all manner of travell farewell, what show soever it bear; and in
general shun all passions that any way empeach the tranquillitie of mind and body, and
follow the course best agreeing with his humor.
Vnusquisque sua noverit ire via. -- Propert. ii. El. xxv. 38.
His own way every man
Tread-out directly can.
A man must give to thriving husbandrie, to laborious study, to toilesome hunting, and to
every other exercise, the utmost bounds of pleasure; and beware he engage himself no
further, if once pain begin to intermeddle itself with her; we should reserve business
and negotiations only for so much as is behoovefull to keep us in breath, and to warrant
us from the inconveniences which the other extremity of a base, faint-harted idlenesse
draws after it. There are certain barren and thornie sciences, which for the most part are
forged for the multitude: they should be left for those who are for the service of the world.
As for my self, I love no books but such as are pleasant and easy, and which tickle me,
or such as comfort and counsell me, to direct my life and death.
-----tacitum sylvas inter reptare salubres
Curantem quidquid dignum sapiente bonoque est. -- Hor. i. Epist. iv. 4.

Silently creeping midst the wholesome wood
With care what’s for a wise man and a good.
The wiser sort of men, having a strong and vigorous mind, may frame unto themselves
an altogether spirituall life. But mine being common, I must help to uphold my self by
corporall commodities: And age having eftsoones dispoiled me of those that were most
mutable to my fantasia, I instruct and sharpen my appetite to those remaining most
sortable this other season. We must tooth and naile retaine the use of this lives pleasures,
which our years snatch from us one after another:
Carpamus dulcia, nostrum est,
Quod vivis: cinis et manes et fabula fies. -- Pers. Sat. v. 155.
Plucke we sweet pleasures: we your life give you.
Thou shall a tale, a ghost, and ashes be.
Now concerning the end of glory, which Plinie and Cicero propose unto us, it is far
from my discourse: The most opposite humor to solitarie retiring is ambition. ’Glorie and
rest are things that cannot squat in one same form:’ as far as I see, these have nought but
their arms and legs out of the throng, their mind and intent is further and more engaged
in them than ever it was.
Tun’, vetule, auriculis alienis colligis escas? -- Pers. Sat. i. 22.
Gatherst you dotard at these years,
Fresh baits, fine food, for others ears?
They have gone backe that they might leap the better, and with a stronger motion make
a nimbler offer amidst the multitude. Will you see how they shoot-short by a cornes
breadth? let us but counterpoise the advice of two Philosophers, and of two most different
sects: The one writing to Idomeneus, the other to Lucilius, their friends, to divert them
from the managing of affairs and greatness unto a solitarie kind of life. ’You have,’ say
they, ’lived hitherto swimming and floating adrift, come and die in the haven; you have
given the past of your life unto light, give the remainder unto darknesse.’ It is impossible
to give over occupations if you do not also give over the fruits of them: Therefore clear
your self from all care and glory. There is great danger lest the glittering of your
forepassed actions should over much dazle you, indeed, and follow you even to your den.
Together with other concupiscences, shake off that which commeth from the approbation
of others. And touching your knowledge and sufficiencie, take you no care of them, they
will lose no whit of their effect; if your self be anything the better for them. Remember
but him, who being demanded to what purpose he toyled so much about an art, which
could by no means come to the knowledge of many: ’Few are enow for me; one will

suffice, indeed, less than one will content me,’ answered he. He said true: you and another
are a sufficient theatre one for another; or you to your self alone. Let the people be one
unto you, and one be all the people to you: it is a base ambition to go about to draw
glory from ones idlenesse and from ones lurking hole. A man must do as some wild
beasts, which at the entrance of their caves will have no manner of footing seen. You
must no longer seek what the world says of you, but how you must speak unto your
self: withdraw your self into your self; but first prepare your self to receive your self:
it were folly to trust to your self if you cannot governe your self. A man may as well
faile in solitariness as in companie, there are waies for it, until such time as you have
framed your self, such that you dare not halt before your self, and that you shall be
ashamed of and bear a kind of respect unto your self, Obversentur species honestæ
animo: ’Let honest Ideæs still represent themselves before your mind:’2 Ever present Cato,
Phocion, and Aristides unto your imagination in whose presence even fooles would hide
their faults, and establish them as controulers of all your intentions. If they be disordered
and untuned, their reverence will order and tune them again: they will containe you in a
way to be contented with your self; to borrow nothing but from your self, to settle and
stay your mind in assured and limited cogitations, wherein it may best please itself, and
having gotten knowledge of true felicities, which according to the measure a man
understands them, he shall accordingly injoy, and with them rest satisfied, without
wishing a further continuance either of life or name. See here the counsell of truly-pure
and purely-true philosophie not of a vain-glorious, boasting, and prating philosophie, as
is that of the two first.



Return to


CHAPTER XXXIX: A CONSIDERATION UPON CICERO






CHAPTER XXXIX: A CONSIDERATION UPON CICERO
NE WORD more in comparison of these two: There are gathered out of
Ciceroes writings and from Plinies (in mine opinion little agreeing with
his unckle) infinite testimonies of a nature beyond measure ambitious.
Amongst others, that they openly solicit the Historians of their times
not to forget them in their writings: and fortune, as it were in spight,
has made the vanity of their request to continue even to our days, and
long since the histories were lost. But this exceedeth all hearts-
basenesse in persons of that stampe, to have gone about to draw some principal glory
from prating and speaking, even to employ their private Epistles written to their friends; in
such sort, as some missing the opportunity to be sent, they notwithstanding cause them to
be published, with this worthy excuse, that they would not lose their travell and
lucubrations. Is it not a seemly thing in two Roman Consuls, chiefs magistrates of the
common-wealth, Empresse of the world, to spend their time in wittily devising and closely
hudling up of a quaint missive or wittie epistle, thereby to attaine the reputation that they
perfectly understand their mother tongue? What could a seely Schoolmaster, who gets his

living by such trash, do worse? If the acts of Xenophon, or Cæsar, had not by much
exceeded their eloquence, I cannot believe they would ever have written them. They have
endevored to recommend unto posterity, not their sayings, but their doings. And if the
perfection of well- speaking might bring any glory suitable unto a great personage, Scipio
and Lelius would never have resigned the honor of their comedies, and the elegancies
and smooth-sportfull conceits of the Latine tongue, unto an African servant: For, to prove
this labor to be theirs , the exquisit eloquence and excellent invention thereof does
sufficiently declare it: and Terence himself does avouch it: And I could hardly be
removed from this opinion. It is a kind of mockerie and injurie to raise a man to worth by
qualities mis-seeming his place and unfitting his calling, although for some other respects
praise-worthy; and also by qualities that ought not to be his principal object. As he that
would commend a King to be a cunning painter, or a skilfull architect, or an excellent
Harquibuzier, or a never-missing-missing runner at the Ring. These commendations
acquire a man no honor if they be not presented altogether with those that are proper and
convenient unto him, that is to say, justice, and the skill to governe, and knowledge to
direct his people both in peace and war. In this sort does Agriculture honor Cyrus, and
Eloquence Charlemaine, together with his knowledge in good letters. I have in my time
seen some who by writing did earnestly get both their titles and living, to disavow their
aprentissage, mar their pen, and affect the ignorance of so vulgar a quality; and which our
people holds to be seldom found amongst wise men, endeavouring to commend for better
qualities. Demosthenes his companions in their ambassage to Philip, praised their Prince
to be fair, eloquent, and a good quaffer. Demosthenes said, they were commendations
rather fitting a woman, an advocate, and a spunge, than a King.
Imperet bellante prior, jacentem
Lenis in hostem. -- 1 HOR. Car. Secul. 51.
Better he rule, who mercifull will rue
His foe subdued, than he that can subdue.
It is not his profession to know either how to hunt cunningly or to dance nimbly.
Orabunt causas alii, cælique meatus
Describent radio, et fulgentia sidera dicent;
Hic regere imperio populos sciat. --Virg. Æn. vi. 850.
Others shall causes plead, describe the skies’
Motion by instrument, say how stars rise:
But let him know to rule (just, valiant, wise).
Plutarke says, moreover, That to appear so absolutely excellent in these less-necessarie
parts, is to produce a witness against himself, to have ill spent his hours and fondly-

bestowed his studye which might better have been employed to more behoovefull and
profitable use. So that Philip, King of Macedon, having heard great Alexander, his son,
sing at a feast and vie with the best musitians: ’Art you not ashamed (said he unto him) to
sing so well?’ And to the same Philip said a musitian, gainst whom he contended about his
Art, ’God forbid, my Sovereigne, that ever so much hurt should befall you, that you should
understand these things better than my self.’ A King ought to be able to answer, as
Iphicrates did the Orator who in his invective urged him in this manner: ’And what art
you, you shouldst so brave it? Art you a man at Armes? Art you an Archer? Art you a
Pikeman?’ ’I am none of all those, but I am he who command all those.’ And Antisthenes
made it as an argument of little value in Ismenias, when some commended him to be an
excellent Flutist. Well I wot that when I hear some give themselves to dwell on the
phrase of my Essayes, I would rather have them hold their peace: They do not so much
raise the words as depresse the sense; so much the more sharply by how much more
obliquely. Yet am I deceived if some others take not more hold on the matter; and how
well or ill soever, if any writer has scattered the same, either more materiall, or at least
thicker on his paper: That I may collect the more, I do but huddle it; the arguments or
chief heads. Let me but adde what followes them, I shall daily increase this volume. And
how many stories have I glanced at therein, that speak not a word, which whosoever shall
unfold may from them draw infinite Essayes? Nor they, nor my allegations do ever serve
simply for examples, authority, or ornament. I do not only respect them for the use I
draw from them. They often (beyond my purpose) produce the seed of a richer subject and
bolder matter, and often, collaterally, a more harmonious tune, both for me, that will
express no more in this place, and for them that shall hit upon my tune. But returning to
virtue. I find no great choice betweene him that can speak nothing but evil, and one that
can talk nothing but to talk well. Non est ornamentum virile concinnitas (Sen. Epist.
cxv. p.). ’Finenesse is no great grace for a man.’ Wise men say, that in respect of
knowledge, there is nothing but philosophy, and in regard of effects, but Vertue: which is
generally fit for all degrees and for all orders. Something there is likewise in these two other
philosophers; for they also promise eternitie to the Epistles they write to their friends. But
after another fashion, and to a good purpose, accommodating themselves to others vanity:
For they send them word, that if care to make themselves knowen unto future ages, and
respect of renown, does yet retaine them in the managing of affairs, and makes them
fear solitarmesse and a retired life, to which they would call them, that they take no more
paines for it: for as much as they have sufficient credit with posterity, by answering them;
and were it but by the epistles they write unto them, they will make Their name as famous
and as far knowen, as all their public actions might do. Besides this difference, they
are not frivolous, idle, and triviall Epistles, and only compact and held together with
exquisite choise words, hudled-up and ranged to a just smoothe cadence, but stufft and
full of notable sayings and wise sentences; by which a man does not only become more
eloquent, but more wise, and that teach us not to say well, but to do well. Fie on that
eloquence which leaves us with a desire of it, and not of things; unless a man will say
that Ciceroes being so exceedingly perfect does frame itself a body of perfection. I will
further alleage a story, which to this purpose we read of him, to make us palpably feel

his natural condition. He was to make an Oration in public, and being urged betimes to
prepare himself for it, Eros, one of his servants, came to tel him the Auditorie was
deferred till the morrow next; he was so glad of it, that for so good news he gave him his
liberty. Touching this subject of Epistles, thus much I will say: It is a work wherein my
friends are of opinion I can do something; and should more willingly have undertaken to
publish my gifts had I had who to speak unto. It had been requisite (as I have had other
times) to have had a certain commerce to draw me on, to encourage me, and to uphold
me. For, to go about to catch the winde in a net, as others do, I cannot; and it is but a
dreame. I am a sworne enemy to all falsifications. I should have been more attentive and
more assured, having a friendly and strong direction, than to behold the diverse images of a
whole multitude: and I am deceived if it be not better succeeded with me. I have naturally
a comical and familiar stile: But after a manner peculiar unto my self, inept to all public
Negotiations, answering my speech which is altogether close, broken, and particular: I
have no skill in ceremonious letters, which have no other substance but a fair contexture
of complemental phrases and curteous words. I have no taste nor faculty of these tedious
offers of service or affection. I believe not so much as is said, and am nothing pleased to
say more than I believe. It is far from that which is used nowadaies: For, there was never
so abject and servile a prostitution of presentations; life, soul, devotion, adoration,
servant, slave; all these words are, so generally used, that when they would express a
more emphatical intent and respective will, they have no means left them to express it. I
deadly hate to hear a flatterer: which is the cause I naturally affect a pithy, sinnowie, drie,
round, and harsh kind of speach; which of such as have no further acquaintance with me,
is judged to encline to disdeine. I honor them most whom I seem to regard least: And
where my mind marcheth most cheerfully, I often forget the steps of gravitie: And I offer
my self but faintly and rudely to those whose I am indeed, and present my self least to
such as I have most given my self. Me thinkes they should read it in my heart, and that
the expression of my words wrongeth my conception. To welcome, to take leave, to bid
farewell, to give thanks, to salute, to present my service, and such verball complements of
the ceremoniall laws of our civilitie, I know no man so sottishly-barren of speeche as my
self. And I was never employed to indite letters of favor or commendatorie, but he for
whom they were, judged them drie, barren, and faint. The Italians are great Printers of
Epistles, whereof I think I have a hundred severall volumes. I deem those of Hanniball
Caro to be the best. If all the paper I have heretofore scribled for ladies were extant, at
what time my hand was truly transported by my passion, a man should perhaps find some
page worthy to be communicated unto idle and fond-doting youth, embabuinized with this
fury. I ever write my letters in post-hast, and so rashly headlong, that howbeit I write
intolerably ill, I had rather write with my own hand than employ another: for I find
none that can follow me, and I never copy them over again. I have accustomed those
great persons that know me to endure blots, blurs, dashes, and botches, in my letters, and a
sheete without folding or margine. Those that cost me either most labor or studie are they
that are least worth. When I once begin to traile them, it is a signe my mind is not upon
them. I commonly begin without project: the first word begets the second. Our modern
letters are more fraught with borders and prefaces than with matters, as I had rather write

two than fold and make up one, which charge I commonly resigne to others: So likewise
when the matter is ended, I would willingly give another the charge to adde these long
orations, offers, praiers, and imprecations, which we place at the end of them, and wish
hartily some new fashion would discharge us of them. As also to superscribe them with a
legend of qualities, titles, and callings, wherein, lest I might have tripped, I have often
times omitted writing, especially to men of Justice, Lawyers, and Financiers. So many
innovations of offices, so difficult a dispensation and ordinance of diverse names and titles
of honor, which being so dearely bought, can neither be exchanged or forgotten without
offence. I likewise find it gracelesse and idly-foolish to charge the front and inscription of
the many bookes and pamphlets which we daily cause to be imprinted with them.



Return to


CHAPTER XL: THAT THE TASTE OF GOODS OR EVILS DOTH GREATLY DEPEND ON
THE OPINION WE HAVE OF THEM






CHAPTER XL: THAT THE TASTE OF GOODS OR EVILS DOTH GREATLY DEPEND ON
THE OPINION WE HAVE OF THEM
EN (says an ancient Greeke sentence) are tormented by the opinions
they have of things, and not by things themselves. It were a great
conquest for the ease of our miserable humane condition; if any man
could establish every where this true proposition. For if evils have no
entrance into us but by our judgement, it seems that it lieth in our
power either to contemne or turn them to our good: If things yield
themselves unto our mercy, why should we not have the fruition of
them or apply them to our advantage? If that which we call evil and torment, be neither
torment nor evil, but that our fancie only gives it that quality, it is in us to change it: and
having the choice of it, if none compell us, we are very fooles to bandy for that partie
which is irkesome unto us: and to give infirmities, indigence, and contempt, a sharpe and
ill taste, if we may give them a good: And if fortune simply affoord us the matter, it lieth
in us to give it the form. Now that that which we terme evil is not so of itself, or at

least such as it is that it depends of us to give it another taste and another countenance (for
all comes to one), let us see whether it can be maintained. If the originall being of those
things we fear, had the credit of its own authority to judge itself in us, likewise and
semblable would it lodge in all: For men be all of one kind, and except the most or least,
they are furnished with like means to judge and instruments to conceive. But the
diversitie of opinions which we have of those things, does evidently show that but by
composition they never enter into us. Some one perhaps does lodge them in himself,
as they are in essence, but a thousand others give them a new being, and a contrary. We
accompt of death, of povertie, and of sorrow, as of our chiefest parts. Now death, which
some of all horrible things all the most horrible, who knowes not how others call it the
only leaven of this lives torments? the sovereign good of nature? the only staie of our
liberty? and the readie and common receit of our evils? And as some do, fearefully-
trembling and senslesly-affrighted, expect her coming, others endure it more easily than
life: And one complaineth of her facilitie:
Mors utinam pavidos vitæ subducere nolles,
Sed virtus te sola daret! -- Lucan. iv. 580.
O death! I would you would’st let cowards live,
That resolv’d valor might you only give.
But let us leave these glorious minds: Theodorus answered Lysimachus, who threatened
to kill him: ’Thou shall do a great exploit to come to the strength of a Cantharides.’ The
greatest number of Philosophers are found to have either by designe prevented, or hastned
and furthered their deaths. How many popular persons are seen brought unto death, and
not to a simple death, but entermixt with shame and sometimes with grievous torments, to
embrace it with such an undaunted assurance, some throngh stubborne wilfulnesse, other
some through a natural simplicitie, in whom is nothing seen changed from their
ordinary condition; selling their domesticall affairs, recommending themselves unto
their friends preaching, singing, and entertaining the people: indeed, and sometimes uttering
words of jesting and laughter, and drinking to their acquaintance, as well as Socrates? One
who was led to the gallowes, desired it might not be through such a street, for fear a
Merchant should set a Serjant on his backe for an old debt. Another wished the hang-man
not to touch his throat, lest he should make him swowne with laughing, because he was
so ticklish. Another answered his confessor, who promised him he should stop that night
with our Saviour in heaven, ’Go thither yourselfe to supper, for I use to fast a nights.’
Another upon the gibbet calling for drinke, and the hang-man drinking first, said he
would not drinke after him for fear he should take the pox of him. Everie man has
heard the tale of the Piccard, who being upon the ladder readie to be throwen down, there
was a wench presented unto him, with this offer (as in some cases our law does sometimes
tolerate) that if he would marrie her, his life should be saved, who after he had a while
beheld her, and perceiving that she halted, said hastily, ’Away, away, good hang-man,
make an end of your business, she limps.’ The like is reported of a man in Denmarke, who

being adjudged to have his head cut off, and being upon the scaffold, had the like
condition offered him, but refused it, because the wench offered him was jaw-falne,
longcheekt, and sharpe-nosed. A young lad at Tholous being accused of heresie in all
points touching his beleefe referred himself wholly to his Masters faith (a young schollar
that was in prison with him) and rather chose to die than he would be persuaded that his
Master could erre. We read of those of the town of Arras at what time King Lewis the
eleventh took it, that amongst the common people many were found who rather than they
would say ’God save the King,’ suffered themselves to be hanged. And of those base-
minded jesters or buffons, some have been seen, that even at the point of death would
never leave their jesting and scoffing. He whom the heads-man threw off from the
Gallowes cried out, ’Row the Gally,’ which was his ordinary by-word. Another, who
being at his last gasp, his friends had lain him upon a pallet alongst the fire-side, there to
breathe his last, the Physitian demanding where his grief pained him? answered,
’Betweene the bench and the fire:’ And the Priest to give the last unction, seeking for his
feet, which by reason of his sicknesse were shrunken up, he told him ’My good friend, you
shall find them at my legs ends if you look well.’ To another that exhorted him to
recommend himself to God, he asked, ’Who is going to him?’ And the fellow answering,
’Yourselfe shortly:’ ’If it be his good pleasure, I would to God it might be to morrow nignt,’
replied he. ’Recommend but your self to him,’ said the other, and you shall quickly be
there.’ ’It is best then,’ answered he, ’that my self carry my own commendations to
him.’ In the, kingdome of Narsinga, even at this day their Priests wives are buried alive
with the bodies of their dead husbands. All other wives are burnt at their husbands
funerals, not only constantly, but cheerfully. When their King dieth, his wives, his
concubines, his minions, together with all his officers and servants, which make a whole
people, present themselves so merrily under the fire wherein his body is burnt, that they
manifestly seem to esteeme it as a great honor to accompanie their deceased master to
his ashes. During our last wars of Millaine, and so many takings, losses, miseries, and
calamities of that City the people, impatient of so many changes of fortune, took such a
resolution unto death, that I have heard my father say he kept accompt of five and twentie
chief householders, that in one weeke made them-selves away: An accident which has
some affinity with that of the Xanthians, who being besieged by Brutus, did pell-mell
headlong, men, women, and children, precipitate them-selves into so furious a desire of
death, that nothing can be performed to avoid death which these did not accomplish to
avoid life: So that Brutus had much adoe to save a very small number of them. Every
opinion is of sufficient power to take hold of a man in respect of life. The first article of
that courageous oath which the Countrie of Greece did sweare and keep in the Median
war, was that every particular man should rather change his life unto death, than the
Persian laws for theirs. What a world of people are daily seen in the Turkish wars, and
the Græcians, more willing to embrace a sharpe, a bitter, and violent death, than to be
uncircumcized and baptized? An example whereof no religion is incapable. The Kings of
Castile having banished the Jewes out of their countrie, King John of Portugall, for eight
crownes a man, sold them a retreit in his dominion for a certain time, upon condition (the
time expired) they should avoid, and he find them ships to transport them into Affrike. The

day of their departure come, which past, it was expressed that such as had not obeyed
should for ever remain bond-slaves, ships were provided them, but very scarce and
sparingly: And those which were embarked were so rudely, churlishly, and villainously
used by the passengers and marines, who besides infinite other indignites, loitred so long
on the seas, now forward, now backward, that in the end they had consumed all their
victuals, and were forced, if they would keep themselves alive, to purchase some of
them, at so excessive a rate and so long, that they were never set ashore till they had
brought them so bare that they had nothing left them but their shirts. The news of this
barbarous inhumanitie being reported to those that were yet on land, most of them
resolved to yield and continue bond-slaves: whereof some made a semblance to change
their religion. Emanuel that immediately succeeded John, being come to the Crowne, first
set them at liberty, then changing his mind, commanded them to depart out of his
dominions, and for their passage assigned them three ports. He hoped, as Bishop Osorius
reporteth (a Latine historian of our ages, not to be despised), that the favor of the liberty
to which he had restored them, having failed to converte them unto Christianitie, the
difficultie to commit themselves unto marriners and pyrates robberies, to leave a Countrie
where they were settled with great riches; for to go seek unknowen and strange regions,
would bring them into Portugall again. But seeing all his hopes frustrate, and that they
purposed to pass away, he cut off two of the three ports he had promised them, that so
the tedious distance and incommoditie of the passage might retaine some, or rather that he
might have the meane to assemble them altogether in one place, for a fitter opportunity of
the execution be intended which was this. He appointed that all their children under
fourteene years of age, should be taken from out of the hands of their parents, and removed
from their sight and conversation, to some place where they might be brought up and
instructed in our religion. He says that this effect caused an horrible spectacle: the natural
affection betweene the fathers and the children, moreover the zeale unto their ancient
faith, striving against this violent ordinance. Divers fathers and mothers were ordinarily
seen to kill themselves, and with a more cruel example, through compassion and love, to
throw their young children into pitts and wells, thereby to shun the Law. The terme which
he had prefixed them being expired, for want of other means they yielded unto
thraldome. Some became Christians, from whose faith and race, even at this day (for it is
an hundred years since) few Portugalls assure themselves; although custom and length
of time be much more forcible counsellors unto such mutations than any other
compulsion. In the town of Castelnaw Darry, more than fifty Albigeois, all heretikes, at
one time, with a determined courage suffred themselves to be burned alive, all in one
same fire, before they would recant and disavow their opinions, Quoties non modo
ductores nostri sed universi etiam exercitus ad non dubiam mortem concurrerunt? (Cic.
Tusc. Qu. i.) ’How often have not only our Leaders (says Tully), but also our whole
armies, run roundly together to an undoubted death?’ I have seen one of my familiar
friends run furiously on death, with such and so deepely in his heart rooted affection, by
diverse visages of discourse, which I could never suppress in him, and to the first that
offered itself masked with a lustre of honor, without apprehending any shape or violent
end, therein to precipitate himself. We have many examples in our days, indeed in very

children, of such as for fear of some slight incommoditie have yielded unto death. And
to this purpose, says an ancient Writer, what shall we not fear, if we fear that which
cowardice itself has chosen for her retrait? Here to huddle up a long head-rowle of
those of all sexes, conditions, sects, in most happy ages, which either have expected death
most constantly, or sought for it voluntarily, and not only sought to avoid the evils of this
life, but some, only to shun the satietie of living any longer: and some, for the hope of a
better condition elsewhere, I should never have done. The number is so infinite, that verily
it would be an easier matter for me to reckon up those that have feared the same. Only this
more. Pirro the Philosopher, finding himself upon a very tempestuous day in a boat,
showed them whom he perceived to be most affrighted through fear, and encouraged
them by the example of an hog that was amongst them, and seemed to take no care at all
for the storme: Shall we then dare to say that the advantage of reason, whereat we seem
so much to rejoice, and for whose respect we account ourselves Lords and Emperours of
all other creatures, has been infused into us for our torment? What availeth the
knowledge of things, if through them we become more demiss? If thereby we lose the
rest and tranquillitie wherein we should be without them? and if it makes us of worse
condition than was Pirrhos hog? Shall we employ the intelligence Heaven has bestowed
upon us for our greatest good, to our ruine? repugning natures desseign and the universal
order and vicissitude of things, which implieth that every man should use his instruments
and means for his own commoditie? Wel (will some tell me) let your rule fit you against
death, but what will you say of indigence and necessitie? what will you also say of mind-
grieving sorrow, which Aristippus, Hieronymus, and most of the wisest have judged-the
last evil? and those which denied the same in words confessed the same in effect?
Possidonius being extremely tormented with a sharpe and painfull sicknesse, Pompey
came to see him, and excused himself he had chosen so unfit an hour to hear him
discourse of Philosophy: ’God forbid (answered Possidonius) that ever pain should so
far usurpe upon me as to hinder me from discoursing of so worthy a subject. And
thereupon began to speak of the contempt of pain. But there whilst she plaied her part,
and uncessantly pinched and urged him, gainst whom he exclaimed: ’Paine do what
you list, I shall never be drawne to say that you are an evil.’ That saying, which they
would make of such consequence, what does it interre against the contempt of pain? it
contends but for the word. And if the pangs thereof move him not therewhilst, why
breakes he off his discourse for it? Why thinks he to work a great exploit, not to call it an
evil? All does not consist in imagination. Here we judge of the rest. It is assured learning
that here does play her part, our own senses are judges of it.
Qui nisi sunt veri; ratio quogue falsa sit omnis.-- Lucr. iv. 487.
Which senses if they be not true,
All reason’s false, it must ensue.
Shall we make our skin believe the stripes of a whip do tickle it? and persuade our
taste that Aloes be wine of Graves? Pirrhos hog is here in our predicament. He is nothing

danted at death, but if you beat him he will grunt, crie, and torment himself. Shall we
force the general law of nature, which in all living creatures under heaven is seen to
tremble at pain? The very trees seem to groan at offences. Death is but felt by
discourse, because it is the motion of an instant.
Aut fuit, aut veniet, nihil est præsentis in illa.
Death has come, or it will not misse;
But in it nothing present is.
Morsque minus pænæ, quam mora mortis habet. -- Ovid. Epis. Ariad. 82.
Deaths pain’s less, roundly acted.
Than when death is protracted.
A thousand beasts, a thousand men, are sooner dead than threatned. Besides, what we
principally call fear in death, it is pain, her customarie fore-runner. Nevertheless if we
must give credit to an ancient father, Malam mortem non facit, nisi quod sequitur mortem.
’Nothing but what follows death makes death to be evil.’ And I might more truly say, that
neither that which goeth before, nor that which commeth after, is no appurtenance of
death, we falsely excuse ourselves. And I find by experience that it is rather the
impatience of the imagination of death that makes us impatient of the pain, and that we
feel it twofold grievous, forasmuch as it threats us to die. But reason accusing our
weaknesse, to fear so sudden a thing, so unavoidable, so insensible; we take this other
more excusable pretence. All evills that have no other danger but of the evil, we count
them dangerlesse. The tooth-ach, the pain of the gowt, how grievous soever, because
they kill not, who reckoneth them in the number of Maladies? Well, suppose that in death
we especially regard the pain: As also povertie has nothing to be feared for but what she
casteth upon us through famine, thirst, cold, heat, and other miseries, it makes us feel and
endure. So have we nothing to do but with pain. I will willingly grant them that it is the
worst accident of our being. For I am the man that hate and shun it as much as possibly
may be; because hitherto (thanks be unto God) I have no commerce or dealing with her:
But it is in our power, if not to dissanull, at least to diminish the same, through patience:
and though tne body should be moved thereat, yet to keep the mind and reason in good
temper. And if it were not so, who then has brought virtue, valor, force, magnanimity,
and resolution into credit? Where shall they play their part if there be no more pain
defied? Avida est periculi virtus: ’ Vertue is desirous of danger.’ If a man must not lie on
the hard ground, armed at all assaies, to endure the heat of the scorching Sunne, to feed
hungerly upon a horse or an asse, to see himself mangled and cut in peeces, to have a
bullet pluckt out of his bones, to suffer incisions, his flesh to be stitcht up, cauterized, and
searched, all incident to a martiall man; how shall we purchase the advantage and
preheminence which we so greedily seek after, over the vulgar sort? It is far from
avoiding the evil and paines of it, as wise men say, that of actions equally good, one

should most be wished to be done wherein is most pain and grief. Non enim hilaritate
nec lascivia, nec risu aut joco comite levitatis, sed sæpe etiam tristes firmitate et
constantia sunt beati: (Cic. De Fin. ii.) ’For men are not happy by mirthfulnesse, or
wantonnesse, or laughing, or jesting, which is the companion of lightness; but often, even
those that are sorrowfull, through their strong heart and constancy.’ And therefore was it
impossible to persuade our fathers that conquests achieved by main force, in the hazard
of war, were not more available and advantageous than those obtained in all securitie by
practices and stratagems.
Lætius est, quoties magno sibi constat honestum. -- Luca. ix. 404.
Honesty makes chiefest cheare
When it does cost itself most dear.
Moreover, this ought to comfort us, that naturally , if pain be violent, it is also short; if
long, it is easy: Si gravis, brevis; si longus, levis. (Cic. De Fin. ii. Epic.) ’If it be grievous,
it is short; if it be long, it is light.’ Thou shall not feel it over long; if you feel it over
much, it will either end itself or end you: All comes to one: If you bear not it, it will
bear you away. Memineris maximos morte finiri, parvos multa habere intervalla
requietis; mediocrium nos esse dominos: ut si tolerabiles sint feramus: sin minus, e vita,
quum ea non placeat, tanquam e theatre exeamus; (i.) ’Remember the greatest are ended
with death, the lesser have many pauses of rest; we are masters of the meane ones: so as if
they be tolerable, we may hear them; if not, we may make an exit from our life, which
does not please, as from a stage. That which makes us endure pain with such impatience
is, that we are not accustomed to take our chief contentment in the soul, and that we do
not sufficiently rely on her, who is the only and sovereign mistris of our condition. The
body has (except the least or most) but one course, and one byase. The soul is variable
in all manner of formes, and rangeth to herself, and to her estate, whatsoever it be, the
senses of the body, and all other accidents. Therefore must she be studied, enquired and
sought after: and her powerful springs and wards should be rowzed up. There is neither
reason, nor prescription, nor force can avail against her inclination and choice. Of so
infinit byases that she has in her disposition, let us allow her one suitable and fit to our
rest and preservation: Then shall we not only be sheltered from all offence, but if it please
her, also gratified and flattered of all grievances and evils. She indifferently makes profit
of all, even errours and dreames, do profitably bestead her, as a loyall matter, to bring us
unto safety and contentment. It may easily be seen, that the point of our spirit is that which
sharpeneth both pain and pleasure in us. Beasts wanting the same leave their free and
natural senses unto their bodies: and by consequence, single well-nigh in every kind, as
they show by the semblable application of their movings. If in our members we did not
trouble the jurisdiction which in that belongs unto them, it may be thought w e should be
the better for it, and that nature has given them a just and moderate temperature toward
pleasure and toward pain; And it cannot chuse but be good and just, being small and
common. But since we have freed and alienated ourselves from her rules, to abandon

ourselves unto the vagabond liberty of our fantasies, let us at least help to bend them to
the most agreeing side. Plato feareth our sharp engaging unto pain and voluptuousness,
forasmuch as he over-strictly tieth and bindeth the soul unto the body: I am rather
opposit unto him, because it is sundred and loosed from it. Even as an enemy becometh
more furious when we flie from him, so does pain grow more proud if it see us tremble
under it. It will stoop and yield upon better compositions to him that shall make head
against it. A man must oppose and bandy against it. In recoyling and giving ground, we
call and draw on the ruine threatning us. Even as the body is more steady and strong to a
charge if it stand stiffely to it, so is the soul. But let us come to examples properly
belonging to weak-backt men, as I am, where we shall find it is with pain as with stones,
which take either higher or deeper colour according to the soyle that is laid under them,
and holdeth no other place in us than we give it. Tantum doluerunt, quantum doloribus se
inseruerunt (August.) ’So much they grieved, as they interessed themselves in griefes.’ We
feel a dash of a chirurgions razor more than ten blows with a sword in the heat of fight.
The painefull throwes of child bearing, deemed both by Physitians and by the word of
God to be very great, and which our women pass with so many ceremonies, there are
whole Nations that make no reckoning of them. I omit to speak of the Lacedemonian
women; but come we to the Swizzers of our Infanterie, what change do you perceive in
them? But that trudging and trotting after their husbands, to day you see them carrie the
child about their neck which but yesterday they bare in their wombe. And those
counterfeit roguing Gyptians, whereof so many are daily seen amongst us, do they not
wash children so soone as they are borne, and in the next river that comes to hand?
Besides so many harlots which daily steale their children in the delivery as in the
conception. The beauteous and noble Lady of Sabinus, a Roman Patritian, for the interest
of others did alone, without any bodies helpe or assistance an without noise or groning,
endure the bearing and deliverie of two twins. A simple lad of Lacedemon having stolne a
fox (for they more feared the shame of their foolishnesse in stealing than we fear the
pain or punishment of mis-deeds) and hiding the same under his cloake, endured rather
to have his guts gnawne out by her, than to discover himself. Another, while offering
incense at a sacrifice, suffered his flesh to burne to the bone by a coale falne into his
sleeve, rather than he would trouble that sacred mysterie. And a great number have been
seen, for the only essay of virtue, following their institution, that at the age of seven
years, without so much as changing their countenance, have endured to be whipped to
death. And Cicero has seen whole troups to beat one another so long with their fists,
with their feet, and with their teeth, till they have fainted and fallen down halfe dead,
before ever they would confesse to be overcome. Nunquam naturam mos vinceret, est
enim ea semper invicta: sed nos umbris, delitiis, otio, languore, desidia, animum
infecimus: opinionibus maloque more delinitum mollivimus: (Cic. Tusc. Quest. v.)
’Custome should never overcome nature, for she is still invincible: but we have infected
our mind with shadowes, daintinesse, idlenesse, faint-heartednesse, slothfulnesse, and
have effeminaied it, inveagled with opinions and evil customs.’ Every man knows the
story of Scævola, who being entered the enemies campe, with a full resolution to kill their
Chieftaine, and having missed of his purpose, to checke his effect with a stranger

invention, and to clear his country, confessed unto Prosenna (who was the King he
intended to kill) not only his dessigne, but added, moreover, that in his campe there were a
great many Romanes, who had undertaken and sworne the very same enterprise, and were
confederates with him. And to make show of his dread-less magnanimity, having caused
a pan of burning coales to be brought, he saw and suffred his right arm (in penance that it
had not effected his project) to be parched and well-nigh roasted-off: until such time as
his enemy himself, feeling a kind of remorcefull horror, commanded the fire to be
carried away. What shall we say of him that would not vouchsafe to leave, or so much as
to interrupt the reading of his book, whilst he had an incision made into him? And of him
who resolved to skoffe and laugh, even in spight and contempt of the tortures which were
inflicted upon him, so that the raging crueltie of the hangmen that held him, and all the
inventions of torments that could be devised, being redoubled upon him, one in the necke
of another gave him over? But he was a Philosopher; What of one of Cæsars gladiators,
who with a cheerful and smiling countenance endured his wounds to be slit and
sounded? Quis mediocres gladiator ingemuit? Quis vultum mutavit unquam? Qu is non
modo stetit, verum etiam decubuit turpiter? Quis cum decubuisset, ferrum recipere jussus,
collum contraxit? (Cic. Tusc. Quest. ii.) ’What meane Fencer has once groned? Which of
them has once changed his countenance? Which of them not only has stood up, but even
falne with shame? Which of them when he was down, and was willed to take his death,
did once shrinke in his necke?’ But let us join some women unto them. Who has not
heard of her at Paris, which only to get a fresher hew of a new skin, endured to have her
face flayed all over? There are some, who being sound and in perfit health, have had some
teeth puld-out, thereby to frame a daintier and more pleasing voice, or to set them in
better order. How many examples of conternpt of pain or smart have we of that kind and
sex? What can they not do? What will they not do? What fear they to do? So they
may but hope for some amendment of their beautie?
Vellere queis cura est albos a stirpe capillos,
Et faciem dempta pell e refer novam. -- Tibul. i. El. viii. 43.
Who take great care to root out their gray hair.
And skin flayed-off a new face to repare.
I have seen some swallow gravell, ashes, coales, dust, tallow, candles, and for the nonce
labor and toyle themselves to spoile their stomacke, only to get a pale-bleake colour. To
become slender in were, and to have a straight spagnolized body, what pinching, what
girding, what cingling will they not endure? Yea sometimes with yron-plates, with whale-
bones, and other such trash, that their very skin and quick flesh is eaten in and consumed
to the bones; whereby they sometimes work their own death. It is common to diverse
nations of our times, to hurt and gash themselves in good earnest, to give credit to their
words. And our King reporteth sundrie examples of what himself saw in Polonia, and
towards himself. But besides what I know to have by some been imitated in France;
when I came from the famous Parliament of Blois, I had a little before seen a wench in

Picardie to witnes the vehemence of her promises, and also her constancy, with the
bodkin she wore in her hair to give herself foure or five thrusts in her arm, which made
her skin to crack and gush out blood. The Turkes are wont to wound and scarre themselves
for their Ladies sakes, and that the marke may the better appeare, and continue the longer,
they will presently lay fire upon their cuttes; and to stanch the blood, and better to form
the cicatrice, they wil keep it on an incredible while. Honest men that have seen it, have
written the same, and sworne it unto me. And for ten Aspers you shall daily find some
amongst them that will give themselves a deepe gash with a Scimitarie, either in their
arms or thighes. I am very glad witnesses are so ready at hand where we have most need
of them: For Christendome affordeth many. And after the example of our holy guide,
there have been diverse who for devotion would needs bear the crosse. We learne by a
worthy testimony of religion, that Saint Lewes the King wore a hair shirt, until such
time as he was so aged that his confessor gave him a dispensation for it; and that every
Friday he caused his priests to beat his shoulders with five little yron chaines, which to
that purpose were ever caried with his nightgeare. William our last Duke of Guyenne,
father to that Eleonore who transferred that Dutchy unto the houses of France and
England, the last ten or twelve years of his life, for penance-sake, wore continually a
corselet under a religious habit. Foulkes Earle of Anjou went to Jerusalem, there with a
rope about his necke to be whipped by two of his servants, before our Saviours sepulchre.
Doe we not upon every Good-Friday, in sundrie places, see a great number of men and
women scourge and beat themselves so long, till they bruse and teare their flesh, even to
the bones? I have often seen it my self; and that without enchantment; And some say
(for they are masked) there were some amongst them, who for monie would undertake
thereby to warrant other mens religion, by a contempt of smart-full pain, so much the
greater by how much the stings of devotion are of more force than those of covetousnes.
Q. Maximus buried his son who had been Consull: Marcus Cato his, being elected
Pretor; and L. Paulus both his, within few days, with so cheerful and setled a
countenance, and without any show of sorrow. I have sometimes by way of jesting told
one that he had confronted divine justice: For, the violent death of three tall children of
his, cumming unto his ears all upon one day, and sent him, as it may be imagined, as a
great scourge: he was so far from mourning, that he rather took it as a favor and
singular gratification at Gods hand. I do not follow these monstrous humors. Yet have I
lost two or three my self, whilst they were young and at nurce, if not without
apprehension of sorrow, yet without continuæce of griefs. And ’there is no accident
woundeth mon deeper, or goeth so near the heart as the loss of children.’ I see diverse
other common occasions of affliction which, were I assailed by them, I should scarcely
feel. And I have contemned and neglected some, when it has pleased God to visit me
with them, on which the world setteth so ugly and balefull a countenance, that I hardly
dare boast of them without blushing. Ex quo intelligitur, non in natura, sed in opinione
esse ægretudinem. (Cic. ib. iii.) ’Whereby it is understood that grief consisteth not in
nature, but opinion.’ Opinion is a powerful, bould, and unmeasureable party. Who does
ever so greedily search after rest-full ease and quietnes as Alexander and Cæsar have done
after difficulties and unquietnesse? Terez, the father of Sitalcez, was wont to say, that

when he had no wars, he thought there was no difference betweene him and his horse-
keeper. Cato the Consull, to assure himself of certain townes in Spain, having only
interdicted some of their inhabitants to weare arms, many of them killed themselves:
Ferox gens nullam vitam rati sine, armis esse: ’A fierce kind of people, that thought there
was no life without arms.’ How many know we who have abandoned and forsaken the
pleasure of an ease-full and quiet life in their houses, and to live with their friends and
acquaintance, to follow the toyling-horror of unfrequented deserts, and that yielded and
cast themselves unto the abjectnesse, contempt and vilifying of the world, wherwith they
have so pleased themselves, as nothing more; Cardinall Boromeus, who died lately at
Milan, in the midst of the pleasures and debawches to which his nobility, and the great
riches he possessed enticed him, and the air of Italy afforded him, and his youth allured
him, did ever keep himself in so an austere form of life, that the same gowne which
served him in summer he wore in winter. He never lay but upon straw: the hours which
he might conveniently spare from his charge, he bestowed in continual study, ever
kneeling, and having a smal quantitie of bread and water by his bookes side, which was all
the provision for his repast, and time he employed in study. I know some who wittingly
have drawne both profit and preferment from cuckoldrie, the only name whereof is so
yrksome and bail-ful to so many men. If sight be not the most necessarie of our senses, at
least is it the most pleasing: the most plausible and profitable of our members, seem
those that serve to beget us: notwithstanding diverse have mortally hated them, only
because they were over much amiable, and for their worths-sake have rejected them. So
thought he of his eyes, that voluntarily put them out. The most common and soundest part
of men holdeth multitude of children to be a signe of great happinesse and comfort; So do
I, and many others, the want of them. And when Thales was demanded why he did
not marrie, he answered, because he would leave no issue or line of himself behinde him.
What our opinion endeareth and increaseth the price of things, it is seen in a great
number of them, which we do not regard to esteeme them, but for our use. As we neither
consider their qualities nor utilities, but only our cost to recover and attaine them; as if it
were a part of their substance; and we call that worth in them, not what they bring us, but
what we bring to them. According as it weigheth and is of consequence, so it serveth.
Whereupon I perceive we are thriftie husbands of what we lay out. Our opinion never
suffers it to run a false gallop. ’The price gives a Diamond his title, difficultie to virtue,
pain unto devotion, and sharpnesse unto physicke.’ Such a one to come unto povertie,
cast those fewe crownes he had into the same sea wherein so many others, with such
carke, danger, and care, on all parts seek to fish for riches. Epicurus says, that ’To be rich
is no ease, but a change of affairs.’ Verily, it is not want, but rather plentie that causeth
avarice. I will speak of my own experience concerning this subject. I have lived in
three kinds of condition since I came out of my infancie. The first time, which continued
well-nigh twentie years. I have past it over as one who had no other means but casual,
and depending from the direction and helpe of others, without any certain maintenance or
regular prescription. My expences were so much the more carelessely layed out and
lavishly employed, by how much more they wholy depended on fortunes rashnesse and
exhibition. I never lived so well at ease: my fortune was never to find my friends purse

shut; besides which, I was to frame my self to all necessities: the care I took to pay
every man at his prefixed day, which a thousand times they have prolonged, seeing the
care I took to satisfie them. So that I had gotten unto my self the credit of a thriftie kind
of good husbandrie, though it were something shifting and deceitful. I do naturally feel a
kind of pleasing contentment in paying of my debts, as if I rid my self of a burthenous
weight, and free my self from the yoake of bondage and ingratitude. Besides, me thinks I
feel a kind of delight that tickleth me to the quick, in performing a lawfully just action,
and contenting of others. I except payments that require delayes, covenants, and after
reckonings: for, if I find any body that will undertake them, I blushingly and injuriously
deferre them as long as I can, for fear of that altercation or wrangling to which my humor
and manner of speech is altogether incompatible. There is nothing I hate more than
driving of bargaines: It is a meere commerce of dodging and impudencie. After an hours
debating and paltring, both parties will go from their words and oaths for the getting or
saving of a shilling: yet did I borrow with great disadvantage. For, having no heart to
borrow before others, or by word of mouth, I would adventure it upon a peece of paper,
which with some has no great power to move or force to persuade, and which greatly
helps to refuse, I was wont to commit the success of my wants more freely and more
carelessely unto fortune than I have done since unto my wit and providence. Most good
husbands think it strange add horrible to live on such uncertainties, but they remember
not that most men in the world live so. How many good and well-borne men have
heretofore, and are daily seen to neglect and leave at six and seven their patrimonies and
certain goods, to follow and seek after court-holy water and wavering favors of Princes
and of fortune; Cæsar engaged and endebted himself above a million of gold more than
he was worth to become Cæsar . And how many merchants and poore beginners set up
and begin their traffike by the sale of their farmes or cottages which they ventur to the
Indias?
Tot per impotentia freta. -- Catul. Epig. iv. 18.
In so great scarcitie of devotion we have thousands of Colleges, which pass the time
very conveniently, daily gaping and expecting from the liberalitie of the heavens what
they must dine withall to morrow. Secondly, they consider not that this certaintie on w
hich the ground themselves, is not much less uncertaine and hazardous than hazard it
self. I see misery as near beyond two thousand crownes rent, as if it were hard at hand.
For, besides that fortune has many-many means to open a hundred gaps for povertie to
enter at, even through the thickest of our riches, and that often there is no meane betweene
the highest and lowest fortune.
Fortuna vitrea est: tum quum splendet frangitur. -- Prov. Senec. f.
Fortune is glasse-like, brittle as ’ tis bright:
Light-gon, light-broken, when it lends best light.

And to turn all our defences and raisings of high walls topsie-turvie: I find that want
and necessitie is by diverse or different causes, as ordinarily seen to accompanie and
follow those that are rich in goods, as those that have none at all: and that perhaps it
is somewhat less incommodious when it is alone, than when it meeteth with riches. They
rather come from order than from receit: Feber est sua quisq ue fortunæ: (Eras. Chil. ii.
cent. iv. eid. 63) ’Every man is the forger of his own fortune.’ And methinkes that a rich
man who is needy, full of business, carke and toyle, and troubled in mind, is more
miserable than he that is simply poore. In divitiis inopes quod genus egestatis
gravissimum est. (Sen. Epist. lxxiv. p.) ’In their abundance indigent, which is the most
grievous kind of indigence.’ The richest and greatest princes are ordinarily urged by
povertie and need unto extreme necessities. For, can any be more extreme than thereby to
become Tyrants, and unjust usurpers of their subjects goods. My second manner of life
has been to have money; which when I had once fingred, according to my condition I
sought to hoard up some against a rainie day; esteeming that it was no having unless a
man had ever somewhat besides his ordinary expenses in possession: and that a man
should not trust that good which he must live in hope to receive; and that, be his hopes
never so likely, he may many ways be prevented. For, I would say unto my self; what
if I should be surprised by this chance or that accident? What should I do then? And in
pursuit of these vain and vicious imaginations, I endeavour by hooke or crooke, and by
wile or wit, to provide by this superfluous sparing for all inconveniences that might
happen: And I could answer him that would alleage the number of inconveniences to be
over infinit: which if they followed not all men, they accompanied some, and perhaps the
greatest number. An apprehension which I did not pass without some painfull care. I kept
the matter secret, and I (that dare say so much, of myself) would never speak of my
money but falsly; as others do, who being rich, would seem to be poore, or being poore,
would appeare rich: and dispense with their conscience, never to witness sincerely what
they are worth. Oh ridiculous and shamefull prudence. Did I travell any where? me
thought I was never sufficiently provided; and the more I had laden my self with coine,
the more I had also burdened my self with fear: sometimes of my ways-safetie,
othertimes of their trust that had the charge of my sumpters and baggage, whereof as some
others that I know, me thought I was never throughly assured, except it were still in my
sight. Left I my keyes or my purse behind me? how many suspitions and thornie
imiginations, and which is worse, incommunicable, did uncessantly haunt me? My mind
was ever on my halfpenny; my thoughts ever that way. The summe being rightly cast,
there is ever more pain in keeping than in getting of monie. If I did not altogether so
much as I say, I at the least endeavoured to do it. Of commoditie I had little or nothing.
To have more means of expenses, is ever to have increase of sorrow. For (as said Bion)
’The hairie man does grieve as much as the bald, if he have his hair pulled out.’ And after
you are once accustomed, and have fixed your thoughts upon a heape of monie, it is no
longer at your service; you dare not diminish it; it is a building which, if you touch or take
any part from it, you will think it will all fall. Necessitie must first pinch you by the
throat, and touch you near, before you will lay hands on it. And I should sooner pawne
my clothes, or sell my horse with less care and compulsion, than make a breach into that

beloved purse which I kept in store. But the danger was that a man can hardly prefix a
certain limits unto his desire (they are hard to be found in things a man deemeth good)
and continue at one stay in sparing: A man shall ever encrease this heape from one
number to another; indeed so long till he basely and niggardly deprive himself of enjoying
his own goods, and wholly fix on the safe keeping of them, and never use them.
According to this kind of usage, those are the richest people of the world have the charge
of keeping the gates and walles of a rich Cittie. Every monied man is covetous, according
to mine opinion. Plato marshalleth [thus] humane or corporall goods; health, beautie,
strength, riches: And riches (says he) are not blind, but clear-seeing, if they be
illummated by wisdom. Dionysius the younger plaid a notable part; who being advertised
that one of his Siracusans had hidden a certain treasure under the ground, commanded
him to bring it unto him, which he did, reserving secretly one part of it unto himself, with
which he removed his dwelling unto another City, where having lost the humor of
hoarding up of treasure, began to live a spending and riotous kind of life: which
Dionysius hearing, commanded the remainder of his treasure, and which he had taken
from him, to be restored unto him; saying, that ’sithence he had learned how to make use
of it, he did most willingly redeliver the same unto him.’ I was some years of the same
humor: I wot not what good Demon did most profitably remove me from it, like to the
Siracusan, and made me to neglect my sparing. The pleasure I apprehended of a far and
chargeable journey having overthrowne this foolish imagination in me; From which I am
falne into a third kind of life (I speak what I think of it) assuredly much more pleasing
and formall: which is, that I measure my garment according to my cloth , and let my
expenses go together with my coming in; sometimes the one, otherwhilst the other
exceeds: But they are never far asunder. I live from hand to mouth, from day to day, and
have I but to supply my present and ordinary needs, I am satisfied: As for extraordinarie
wants, all the provisions of the world will not suffice them. And it is folly to expect that
fortune will ever sufficiently arm us against herself. It is with our own weapons that
we must combat her. Casuall arms will betray us, when we shall have most need of them.
If I lay up anything, it is for the hope of some employment at hand, and not to purchase
lands, whereof I have no need, but pleasure and delight. Non esse cupidum, pecunia est:
non esse emacem, vectigal est: (Cic. Parad. ult.) ’It is currant coine not to be covetous: it
is a thriftie income not to be still buying.’ I am neither possessed with fear that my goods
shall faile me, nor with desire that they should encrease and multiply. Divitiarum fructus
est in copia; Copiam declarat satietas: (ibid.) ’The fruit of riches is in plentie: satietie
content with enough, approves that plentie.’ And I singularly gratifie my self this
correction came upon me in an age naturally inclined to covetousnesse and that I am free
from that folly so common and peculiar to old men, and the most ridiculous of all humane
follies. Feraulez who had passed through both fortunes, and found that encrease of goods
was no accrease of appetite to drinke, to eat, to sleepe, or to embrace his wife; and who on
the other side felt heavily on his shoulders the importunitie of ordering and directing his
Oeconomicall affairs, as it does on mine, determined with himself to content a poore
young man, his faithfull friend, greedily gaping after riches, and frankly made him a
present donation of all his great and excessive riches; as also of those he was likely everie

day to get by the liberalitie and bountie of his good master Cyrus and by war: always
provided he should undertake to entertaine and find him, honestly and in good sort, as
his guest and friend. In which estate they lived afterward most happily, and mutually
content with the change of their condition. See here a part I could willingly find in my
heart to imitate. And I much commend the fortune of an old prelate, whom I see to have
so clearly given over his purse, his receits, and his expenses, now to one of his chosen
servants, and now to another, that he has lived many years as ignorant of his household
affairs as any stranger. The confidence in others honesty is no light testimony of ones
own integritie: therefore does God willingly favor it. And for his regard, I see no
household order, neither more worthily directed, nor more constantly managed than his.
Happy is that man that has so proportionably directed his estate, as his riches may
discharge and supply the same, without care or encombrance to himself: and that neither
their consultation or meetings may in any sort interrupt other affairs, or disturbe other
occupations, which followeth, more convenient, more quiet, and better agreeing with his
heart. Therefore does ease and indigencie depend from every mans own opinion; and
wealth and riches, no more than glory or health, have either more preheminence or
pleasure, than he who possesseth them, lendeth them. Every man is either or ill, according
as he findes himself. Not he whom another thinkes content, but he is content indeed that
thinkes he is so himself; And only in that, opinion gives itself essence and veritie.
Fortune does us neither good nor ill: She only offereth us the seed and matter of it, which
our mind, more powerfull than she, turneth and applieth as best it pleaseth: as the
efficient cause and mistris of condition, whether happy or unhappy. External accessions
take both favor and colour from the internall constitution: As garments do not warme us
by their heat, but by ours, which they are fit to cover and nourish: he that with clothes
should cover a cold body, should draw the very same service from them by cold. So is
snow and yce kept in summer. Verily as unto an idle and lazie body, study is but a
torment: abstinence from wine to a drunkard is a vexation; frugality is a harts sorrow to
the luxurious; and exercise molesteth an effeminate body: so is it of all things else. Things
are not of themselves so irksome nor so hard, but our basenes and weaknesse maketh them
such. To judge of high and great matters, a high and great mind is required; otherwise we
attribute that vice unto them which indeed is ours. A straight oar, being under water
seems to be crooked. It is no matter to see a thing, but the matter is how a man does see
the same. Well, of so many discourses, which diversly persuade men to contemne death
and patiently to endure pain, why shall we not find some one to make for our purpose;
And of so severall and many kinds of imaginations, that have persuaded the same unto
others, why does not every man apply one unto himself, that is most agreeing with his
humor; If he cannot digest a strong and abstersive drug, for to remove his evil, let him at
least take a lenitive pill to ease the same. Opinio est quædam effoeminata ac levis: nec in
dolore magis, quam eadem in voluptate: qua, quum liquescimus fluimusque mollitia, apis
aculeum sine clamore ferre, non possumus. Totum in eo est, ut tibi imperes: (Cic. Tusc.
Quest. ii.) ’There is a certain effeminate and light opinion, and that no more in sorrow
than it is in pleasure, whereby when we melt and run over in daintie tendernes, we cannot
abide to be stung of a be, but must rore and crie out. This is the total summe of all, that

you be master of your self.’ Moreover, a man does not escape from Philosophy by making
the sharpnes of paines and humane weaknesse to provaile so far beyond measure: for she
is compelled to cast herself over again unto these invincible replications. If it be bad to
live in necessitie, at least there is no necessitie to live in necessitie. No man is long time ill
but by his own fault. He that has not the heart to endure neither life nor death, and that
will neither resist nor run away, what shall a man do to him?



Return to


CHAPTER XLI: THAT A MAN SHOULD NOT COMMUNICATE HIS GLORIE






CHAPTER XLI: THAT A MAN SHOULD NOT COMMUNICATE HIS GLORIE
F ALL the follies of the world, the most universall, and of most men
received, is the care of reputation and study of glory, to which we are
so wedded that we neglect and cast-off riches, friends, repose, life and
health (goods effectuall and substantiall), to follow that vain image,
and idlie-simple voice, which has neither body nor hold-fast.
La fama, ch’invaghisce a un dolce suono
Gli superbi mortali, et par si bella,
E un echo, un sogn o, anzi d’un sogno un ombra,
Ch’ad ogni vento si dilegua e sgombra. -- Tass. Gior. can. 14.
Faine that enveagl’s high aspiring men
With her harmonious sound, and seems so fair,
An Eccho is, a dreame, dreames shadow rather,

Which flies and fleets as any winde does gather.
And of mens unreasonable humors, it seems that the best philosophers do most
slowly and more unwillingly clear themselves of this than of another: it is the most
peevish, the most froward, and the most opinative. Quia etiam bene proficientes animos
tentare non cessat (Cic. Pro Arc. Po.). ’Because it ceaseth not to tempt even those Mindes
that profit best.’ There are not many whereof reason does so evidently condemne the
vanity, but it is so deeply rooted in us, as I wot not whether any man could ever clearely
discharge himself of it. When you have alleged all the reasons you can, and beleeved all
to disavow and reject her, she produces, contrary to your discourses, so intestine
inclination, that you have small hold against her. For (as Cicero says), ’Even those that
appugne her, will nevertheless have the bookes they write against her to bear their
names upon their fronts, endeavouring to make themselves glorious by despising of
glory.’ All other things fall within the compasse of commerce: we lend our goods, we
employ our lives, if our friends stand in need of us: But seldom shall we see a man
communicate his honor, share his reputation, and impart his glory unto others. Catulus
Luctatius in the wars against the Cymbres, having done the utmost of his endeavors to
stay his soldiers that fled before their enemies, put himself amongst the runawaies, and
dissembled to be a coward, that so they might rather seem to follow their Captain than
flie from the enemy: This was a neglecting and leaving off his reputatation, to conceal
the shame and reproach of other. When Charles the fifth passed into Provence, the yeare a
thousand five hundred thirty seven, some are of opinion that Anthony de Leva, seeing the
Emperor his master resolutely obstinate to undertake that voyage, and deeming it
wonderfully glorious, maintained nevertheless the contrary, and discounselled him from
it, to the end that all the honor and glory of this counsell might be attributed unto his
Master; and that it might he said, his good advice and foresight to have been such; that
contrary to all mens opinions, he had achieved so glorious an enterprise: Which was, to
honor and magnifie him at his own charges. Thracian Ambassadors comforting
Archileonida, the mother of Brasidas, for the death of her son, and highly extolling and
commending him, said he had not left his equall behind him. She refused this private
commendation and particular praise, assigning it to the public state. ’Doe not tell me that
(quoth she), for knowe the Cittie of Sparta has many greater and more valiant Citizens
than he was.’ At the battle of Crecy, Edward the blacke Prince of Wales, being yet very
young, had the leading of the vant-gard: The greatest and chief violence of the fight was
in his quarter: The Lord and Captain that accompanied him, perceiving the great danger,
sent unto King Edward, the Princes Father, to come and help them: which when he heard,
he enquired what plight his son was in, and how he did, and hearing that he was living
and on horse-backe, ’I should (quoth he) offer him great wrong to go now, and deprive
him of the honor of this combats victory, which he already has so long sustained; what
danger soever there be in it, it shall wholly be his:’ and would neither go nor send unto
him: knowing that if he had gone or sent, it would have been said that without his ayd all
had been lost, and that the advantage of this exploit would have been ascribed unto him.
Semper enim quod postremum adjectum est, id rem totam videtur traxisse. ’For evermore

that which was last added, seems to have drawne on the whole matter.’ In Rome many
thought, and it was commonly spoken, that the chiefest glorious deeds of Scipio were
partly due unto Lælius, who notwithstanding did ever advance the greatness, further the
glory, and second the renown of Scipio, without any respect of his own. And
Theopompus King of Sparta, to one who told him that the commonwealth should subsist
and continue still, forasmuch as he could command so well: ’No,’ said he, ’it is rather
because the people know so well how to obey.’ As the women who succeeded in the
Peeredomes of France had (notwithstanding their sex) right to assist and privilege to plead
in cases appertaining to the jurisdictions of Peeres: so the Ecclesiasticall Peeres,
notwithstanding their profession and function, were bound to assist our Kings in their
wars, not only with their friends, servants, and tenants, but in their own person. The
Bishop of Beauvais, being with Philip Augustus in the battle of Bovines, did very
courageously take part with him in the effect: but thought he should not be partaker of the
fruit and glory of that bludy and violent exercise.He overcame and forced that day many
of the enemies to yield whom he delivered unto the first gentleman he met withall to
rifle, to take them prisoners, or at their pleasure to dispose of them. Which he also did
with William Earle of Salisbury, whom he delivered unto the Lord John of Nesle with a
semblable subtletie of conscience unto this other. He desired to fell and strike down a
man, but not to wound or hurt him, and therefore never fought but with a great club. A
man in my time being accused to the King to have laid violent hands upon a priest, denied
it very stoutly, forasmuch as he had only thumped and trampled him with his feet.



Return to

: Book I
CHAPTER XLII: OF THE INEQUALITIE THAT IS BETWEENE US






CHAPTER XLII: OF THE INEQUALITIE THAT IS BETWEENE US
LUTARKE says in some place, that he findes no such great difference
betweene beast and beast, as he findeth diversitie betweene man and
man.’ He speaks of the sufficience of the mind and of internall
qualities. Verily I find Epaminondas so far (taking him as I suppose
him) from some that I know (I meane capable of common sense) as I
could find in my heart to endeare upon Plutarke, and say there is more
difference betweene such and such a man than there is diversitie betweene such a man and
such a beast.
Hem vir viro quid præstat! -- Ter. Phor. act. v. sc. 3.
O Sir, how much has one,
Another man out-gone?
And that there be so many degrees of spirits as there are steps betweene heaven and earth
and as innumerable. But concerning the estimation of men, it is marvell that, except our

selves, no one thing is esteemed but for its proper qualities. We commend a horse because
he is strong and nimble,
--- --volucrem
Sic laudamus equum, facili cui plurima palma
Fervet, et exultat rauco victoria circo. -- Juven. Sat. viii. 57.
We praise the horse, that bears most bells with flying,
And triumphs most in races hoarse with crying,
and not for his furniture: a greyhound for his swiftnesse, not for his collar: a hawke for her
wing, not for her cranes or bells. Why do we not likewise esteeme a man for that which is
his own? He has a goodly traine of men following him, a stately pallace to dwell in, so
great credit amongst men, and so much rent coming in. Alas, all that is about him and
not in him. No man will buy a pig in a poke. If you cheapen a horse, you will take his
saddle and clothes from him, you will see him bare and abroad: or if he be covered as in
old times they wont to present them unto Princes to be sold, it is only his least necessarie
parts, lest you should ammuse your self to consider his colour or breadth of his crupper;
but chiefly to view his legs, his head, his eyes, and his foot, which are the most
remarkable parts, and above all to be considered and required in him.
Regibus hic mos est, ubi equos mercantur, opertos
Inspiciunt, ne sifacies, ut sæpe, decora
Molli fulta pedi est, emptorem inducat hiantem.
Quod pulchra clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix. -- Hor. i. Sat. ii. 86.
This is Kings manner, when they horses buy,
They see them bare, lest if, as oft we try,
Faire face have soft hoofes, gull’d the, buyer be,
They buttockes round, short head, high crest may see.
When you will esteeme a man, why should you survey him all wrapt and envelloped? He
then but showeth us those parts which are no whit his own, and hideth those from us by
which alone his worth is to be judged. It is the goodnesse of the sword you seek after,
and not the worth of the scabbard; for which perhaps you would not give a farthing if
it want his lyning. A man should be judged by himself, and not by his complements. And
as an Ancient says very pleasantly: Doe you know why you esteeme him tall? You
account the height of his pattens. The base is no part of his stature: measure him without
his stilts. Let him lay aside his riches and externall honors, and show himself in his
shirt. Hath he a body proper to his functions, sound and cheerful? What mind has he?
Is it fair, capable and unpolluted, and happily provided with all her necessary parts? Is
she rich of her own or of others goods? Hath fortune nothing of hers to survey therein?

If broad-waking she wil looke upon a naked sword: if she care not which way her life
goeth from her, whether by the mouth or by the throat, whether it be setled, equable, and
contented. It is that a man must see and consider, and thereby judge the extreme
differences that are betweene us. Is he
------ sapiens, sibique imperiosus,
Quem neque pauperies, neque mors neque vincula terrent,
Responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honores
Fortis et seipso totus teres atque rotundus
Externi ne quid valeat per læve morari,
In quem manca ruit semper fortuna?
A wise man, of himself commander high,
Whom want, nor death, nor bands can terrifie,
Resolv’d t’affront desires, honors to scorne,
All in himself, close, round and neatly-borne,
As nothing outward on his smooth can stay,
Gainst whom still fortune makes a lame assay.
Such a man is five hundred degrees beyond kingdomes and principalities: himself is a
kingdome unto him self.
Sapiens pol ipse fingit fortunam sibi. -- Plau. Trin. act. ii. sc. 2.
Trust me, who bears a wise mans name,
His fortune to himself may frame.
What is there else for him to wish for?
------nonne videmus
Nil aliud sibi naturam latrare, nisi ut quoi
Corpore sejunctus dolor absit, mente fruatur
Incundo sensu, cura semiotus metuque? -- Lucr. ii. 16.
See we not nature nothing else does bark
Unto her-self, but he, whose bodies barke
Is free from paines-touch, should his mind enjoy.
Remov’d from care and fear, with sense of joy!
Compare unto him the vulgar troupes of our men, stupide, base, servile, wavering, and
continually floting on the tempestuous ocean of diverse passions which tosse and retosse
the same, wholy depending of others. There is more difference than is betweene heaven

and earth, and yet such is the blindnesse of our custom that we make little or no account
of it. Whereas, if we consider a Cottager and a King, a noble and a handycrafts man, a
magistrate and a private man, a rich man and a poore, an extreme disparitie does
immediately present itself unto our eyes, which, as a man may say, differ in nothing but
in their clothes. In Thrace, the King was after a pleasant manner distinguished from his
people, and which was much endeared. He had a religion apart: a God severall unto
himself, whom his subjects might no waies adore. It was Mercurie: and he disdained
their gods, which were Mars, Bacchus, and Diana; yet are they but pictures which make
no essential dissemblance. For, as enterlude-plaiers, you shal now see them on the stage
play a King, an Emperor, or a Duke, but they are no sooner off the stage but they are base
rascals, vagabond abjects, and porterly hirelings, which is their natural and originall
condition. Even so the Emperor whose glorious pomp does so dazzle you in public:
Scilicet et grandes viridi cum luce smaragdi
Auro includuntur, teriturque Thalassina vestis
Assidue, et Veneris sudorem exercita potat. --Lucr. iv. 1137.
Great emeralds with their grass-greene light in gold
Are clos’d, nor long can marriage linnen hold,
But worne with use and heat
of Venerie drinks the sweat.
View him behinde the curtaine, and you see but an ordinary man, and perhaps
more vile and more seely than the least of his subjects. Ille beatus introrsum est; istius
bracteata fælicitas est: (Sen. Epist. cxv.) ’One is inwardly happy: anothers felicitie is
plated and guilt-over.’ Cowardise, irresolution, ambition, spight, anger, and envie, move
and work in him as in another:
Non enim gazæ, neque consularis
Summovet lictor miseres tumultus
Mentis, et curas, laqueata circum
-- Tecta [volantes]: -- Hor. ii. Od. xvi. 9.
Nor treasures, nor Maires officers remove
The miserable tumults of the mind,
Or cares that lie about, or flie above
Their high-roof’t houses with huge beames combinde.
And fear, and care, and suspect haunt and follow him, even in the middest of his armed
troupes.
Re veraque metus hominum, curæque sequaces,
Nec metuunt sonitus armorum, nec fera tela,

Audacterque inter reges, rerumque potentes
Versantur, neque fulgorem reverentur ab auro. --Lucr. ii. 46.
Indeed mens still-attending cares and fear,
Nor armor’s clashing, nor fierce weapons fear,
With Kings converse they boldly, and Kings peeres,
Fearing no lightning that from gold appeares.
Does the ague, the megrim, or the gout spare him more than us? When age shall once
seize on his shoulders can then the tall yeomen of his guard discharge him of it? When the
terror of ruthless balefull death shall assails him, can he be comforted by the assistance of
the gentlemen of his chamber? If he chance to be jealous or capricious, will our lowting
curtzies, or putting off of hatts, bring him in tune again? His bedstead enchased all with
gold and pearles has no virtue to allay the pinching pangues of the cholicke.
Nec calidæ citius decedent corpore febres,
Textilibus si in picturis ostroque rubenti
Iacteris, quam si plebeia in veste cubandum est. --Id. ib. 34.
Feavers no sooner from your body flie
If you on arms or red scarlet lie
Tossing, than if you rest
On coverlets home-drest.
The flatterers of Alexander the great made him believe that he was the son of Jupiter;
but being one day fore-hurt, and seeing the blood gush out of his wounds: ’And what
think you of this? (said he unto them), Is not this blood of a lively red hew, and meerly
humane? Methinkes it is not of that temper and which Homer faineth to trill from the gods
wounds.’Hermodorus the Poet made certain verses in honor of Antigonus, in which he
called him the son of Phoebus; to whom he replied: ’My friend, he that emptieth my
close-stools knows well there is no such matter.’ He is but a man at all assaies: And if of
himself he be a man ill-borne, the Empire of the whole world cannot restore him.
-----puellæ
Hunc rapiant, quicquid calcaverit, hic rosa fiat. -- Pers. Sat. ii. 37.
Wenches must ravish him, what ever he
Shall tread upon, eftsoones a rose must be.
What of that? If he be of a grose, stupide, and senseles mind: voluptuousness and
good fortune itself, are not perceived without vigor, wit and livelinesse.

Hæc perinde sunt, ut illius animus qui ea possidet,
Qui uti scit, ei bona, illi qui non utitur recte, mala. -- Ter. Heaut. act. i. sc.
ii. 21.
These things are such, as the possessors mind,
Good, if well us’d; if ill, them ill we find.
Whatsoever the goods of fortune are, a man must have a proper sense to favor them: It is
the enjoying, and not the possessing of them, that makes us happy.
Non domus et fundus, non æris acervus et auri,
Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febres,
Non animo curas; valeat possessor oportet,
Qui comportatis rebus bene cogitat uti.
Qui cupit, aut metuit, juvat illum sic domus aut res,
Ut lippum pictæ tabulæ, fomenta podagram. -- Hor. i. Ep. ii. 47.
Not house and land, and heapes of corne and gold
Rid agues, which their sicke Lords body hold,
Or cares from mind: the owner must be in health,
That well does think to use his hoarded wealth.
Him that desires or feares, house, goods delight
As foments do the gout, pictures sore-sight.
He is a foole, his taste is wallowish and distracted, he enjoyeth it no more than one that
has a great cold does the sweetness of Greeke wine, or a horse the riches of a costly
faired furniture, wherewith he is trapped. Even as Plato says, ’That health, beautie,
strength, riches, and all things else he calleth good, are equally as ill to the unjust as good
to the just; and the evil contrariwise.’ And then, where the body and the soul are in ill
plight, what need these externall commodities? seeing the least pricks of a needle and
passion of the mind is able to deprive us of the pleasure of the worlds Monarchy. The first
fit of an ague, or the first gird that the gout gave him, what avails his goodly tales of
Majesty?
Totus et argento conflatus, totus et auro. -- Tibul. i. El. vii. 71.
All made of silver fine,
All gold pure from the mine
Does he not forthwith lose the remembrance of his pallaces and states? If he be angrie or
vexed, can his principalitie keep him from blushing, from growing pale, from gnashing
his teeth like a Bedlam? Now if it be a man of worth, and well borne, his royalty and his

glorious titles will add but little unto his good fortune.
Si ventri bene, si lateri est, pedibusque tuis, nil
Divitiæ poterunt regales addere majus. -- Hor. i. Ep. xii. 5.
If it be well with belly, feet, and sides.
A Kings estate, no greater good provides.
He seeth they are but illusions and vain deceits. He may perhaps be of King Seleucus his
advice: ’That he who fore-knew the weight of a sceptre, should he find it lying on the
ground, he would not daigne to take it up.’ This he said by reason of the weightie, irksome
and painfull charges that are incident unto a good King. Truely, it is no small in matter to
govern others, since so many crosses and difficulties offer themselves, if we will govern
ourselves well. Touching commanding of others, which in show seems to be so sweet,
considering the imbecillitie of mans judgement, and the difficultie of choice in new and
doubtful things: I am confidently of this opinion, that it is much more easy and plausible
to follow than to guide: and that it is a great setling of the mind to be tied but to one
beaten-path, and to answer but for himself.
Ut satius multo jam sit, parere quietum,
Quam regere imperio res velle. -- Lucr. v. 1137.
Much better ’tis in quiet to obey,
Than to desire with Kings-power all to sway.
Seeing Cyrus said, that it belongs not to a man to command that is not of more worth
than those whom he commandeth.’ But King Hieron in Xenophon addeth moreover, ’That
in truly enjoying of carnall sensualities, they are of much worse condition than private
men: forasmuch as ease and facilitie depriveth them of that sowre-sweet tickling which we
find in them.’
Pinguis amor nimiumque potens, in tædia nobis,
Vertitur, et stomacho dulcis ut esca nocet. -- Ovid. Am. ii. El. xix. 25.
Fat over-powerfull love does loathsome grow,
As fulsome sweet-meats stomackes overthrow.
Thinke we, that high-minded men take great pleasure in music? That satietie thereof
makes it rather tedious unto them. Feasts, banquets, revels, dancings, masks and turneys,
rejoice them that but seldom see them, and that have much desired to see them: the taste
of which becomes cloysome and unpleasing to those that daily see and ordinarily have
them: Nor do ladies tickle those that at pleasure and without suspect may be glutted with

them. He that cannot stay till he be thirsty, can take no pleasure in drinking. Enterludes
and commedies, rejoice and make us merry, but to players they are tedious and tastelesse.
Which to prove, we see it is a delight for Princes, and a recreation for them, sometimes to
disguise themselves, and to take upon them a base and popular kind of life.
Plerumque gratæ principibus vices,
Mundæque parvo sub lare pauperum
Cænæ sine aulæis et ostro,
Sollicitam explicuere frontem. -- Hor. iii. Od. xxix. 13.
Princes do commonly like enterchange,
And cleanely meales where poore-men poorely house,
Without all tapistrie or carpets strange,
Unwrinkled have their care-knit, thought-bent browes.
Nothing does sooner breed a distaste or satietie than plentie. What longing lust would
not be alaid to see three hundred women at his dispose and pleasure as has the Grande
Turke in his Seraille? And what a desire and show of hawking had he reserved to himself
from his ancestors, that never went abroad without seven thousand falkners at least?
Besides which, I think, the luster of greatness brings no small incommodities to the
enjoying of sweeter pleasures: they lie too open and are too much in sight. And I wot not
why a man should longer desire them to conceal or hide their fault; for what in us is
indiscretion the people judgeth to be tyrannie, contempt, and disdaine of the laws in them:
And besides the ready inclination unto vice, it seems they also adde unto it the pleasure
of gourmandizing, and to prostrate publicke-observances under their feet. Verily Plato in
his Gorgias defineth him to be a tyrant that in a City has leave and power to do whatever
he list. And therefore often the show and publication of their vice hurteth more than the
sinne itself. Every man feareth to be spied and controlled; which they are even in their
countenances and thoughts: all the people esteeming to have right and interest to judge of
them. And we see that blemishes grow either lesser or bigger according to the eminence
and light of the place where they are set, and that a mole or a wart in ones forehead is
more apparently perceived than a scarre in another place. And that is the reason why Poets
faine Jupiters loves to have been effected under other countenances than his own; and
of so many amorous shifts and love practices they impute to him, there is but one (as far
as I remember) where he is to be seen in his greatness and majestie. But return we to
Hieron: he also relateth how many incommodities he findeth in his royalty, being so
barred that he cannot at his liberty travell go whether he pleaseth, being as it were a
prisoner within the limits of his country; and that in all his actions he is encircled and
hemd-in with an importunate and tedious multitude. Truely, to see Our Princes all alone,
sitting at their meat, beleagred round with so many talkers, whisperers, and gazing
beholders, unknown what they are or where they come, I have often rather pittied than
envied them. King Alphonsus was wont to say, that ’burden bearing asses were in that in
far better condition than Kings; for their masters suffer them to feed at their ease,

whereas Kings cannot obtaine that privilege of their servants.’ And it could never fall into
my mind that it might be any speciall commoditie to the life of a man of understanding to
have a score of find-faults, picke-thanks, and controllers about his close-stoole, nor that
the service of a man that has a thousand pound rent a yeare, or that has taken Casal, or
defended Sienna, is more commodious or acceptable to him than that of a sufficient and
well- experienced groom. Princelike advantages are in a manner but imaginarie
preheminences. Every degree of fortune has some image of Principalitie: Cæsar termeth
all the Lords, which in his time had justice in France, to be Kinglets, or petty Kings. And
truly, except the name of Sire, we go very far with our Kings. Looke but in the
Provinces remote and far from the court: As for example, in Britaine, the attending
traine, the flocking subjects, the number of officers, the many affairs the diligent service,
the obsequious ceremonies of a Lord, that liveth retired, and in his own house, brought up
amongst his own servants, tenants, and followers: And note also the high pitch of his
imaginations and humors, there is no greater royalty can be seen: He heareth no more
talk of his master than of the Persian King, and hapily but once a year; And knowes but
some far-streicht and old kindred or pedigree, which his Secretarie findes or keepes
upon some ancient record or evidence. Verily our laws are very free, and the burden of
soveraigntie does scarsly concerne a gentleman of France twice in his whole life.
Essentiall and effectuall subjection amongst us does not respect any but such as allure
themselves unto it, and that affect to honor, and love to enrich themselves by such
service: For he that can shrowd and retire himself in his own home, and can manage and
direct his house without sutes in lawe, or quarrell with his neighbors, or domesticall
encombrances, is as free as the Duke of Venice. Paucos servitus, plures servitutem tenent:
(Sen. Epist. 22.) ’Service holds few, but many hold service.’ But above all things Hieron
seems to complain that he perceiveth himself deprived of all mutual friendship,
reciprocall societie, and familiar conversation, wherein consisteth the most perfect and
sweetest fruit of humane life. For, what undoubted testimony of affection and good will
can I expect or exact from him, that, will he or nill he, oweth me all he has, all he can?
Can I make account of his humble speech, of his low lowting curtzie, or of his courteous
offers, since it lieth not in his power to refuse them me? The honor we receive of those
which fear and stand in awe of us, is no true honor. Such respects are rather due to
royalty, to majestie, than to me.
-----maximum hoc regni bonum est,
Quod facta domini cogitur populus sui
Quam ferre, tam laudare. -- Sen. Thyest. act. ii. sc. 1.
This is chief good of Princes domination,
Subiects are forc’t their sovraignes actes and fashions
To bear with patience, pass with commendations.
Doe I not see, that both the bad and the good king are served likewise? That he who is
hated and he that is beloved are both courted likewise? And the one as much fawned upon as

the other? My predecessor was served with the same appearances, and waited upon with
the like ceremonies, and so shall my successor be. If my subiects offend me not, it is no
testimony of any good affection. Wherefore shall I take it in that sense, sithence they
cannot, if they would? No man followeth me for any friendship that is betweene him and
me: inasmuch as no firme friendship can be contracted where is so small relation, so
slender correspondencie, and such disparitie. My high degree has excluded me from the
commerce of men. There is too great an inequalitie and distant disproportion. They follow
for countenance and of customs, or rather my fortune than my self: hoping thereby to
increase theirs. Whatsoever they say, all they do unto me is but a glosse, and but
dissimulation, their liberty being every where brideled and checked by the great power I
have over them. I see nothing about me but inscrutable hearts, hollow mindes, feigned
looks, dissembled speeches, and counterfeit actions. His Courtiers one day commended
Julian the Emperor for ministring of rights and doing of justice. ’I should easily grow
proud’ says he, ’for these praises, if they came from such as durst either accuse or
discommend my contrary actions, should I commit any.’ All the true commodities that
Princes have are common unto them with men of meane fortune. It is for Gods to mount
winged horses, and to feed on Ambrosia. They have no other sleepe, nor no other appetite
than ours. Their steele is of no better temper than that wherewith we arm ourselves.
Their crowne, their diadem can neither hide them from the Sun, or shelter them from the
raine. Dioclesian, that wore one, so much reverenced and so fortunate, did voluntarily
resigne the same, to withdraw himself unto the pleasure of a private life; but a while
after, the urgent necessitie of publicke affairs requiring his presence, and that he should
return to re-assume his charge again, he answered those that solicited him unto it, ’You
would never undertake to persuade me to that had you but seen the goodly rankes of
trees which my self have planted in mine Orchard, or the fair muske-melons I have set
in my garden.’ According to Anacharsis his opinion, ’The happiest estate of a well-ordered
commonwealth should be, where all other things being equally common, precedencie
should be measured and preferments suited according to virtue and desert, and the
contrary according to vice.’ At what time King Pirrhus undertook to pass into Italy,
Cyneas his wise and trustie counsellor, going about to make him perceive the vanity of
his ambition, one day bespake him thus: ’My good sir,’ said he, ’to what end do you
prepare for so great an enterprise?’ He answered suddenly, ’To make my self Lord of
Italie.’ ’That done, what will you do then?’ replied Cyneas, ’I will then pass,’ said
Pirrhus, ’into Gaule, and then into Spain.’ ’And what afterwards?’ ’I will then invade
Affrike, and subdue the same; and at last, when I shall have brought all the world under
my subjection, I will then take my rest, and live contented at mine ease.’ ’Now, for Gods
sake, sir,’ replied Cyneas, ’tell me what hinders you that you be not now, if so you please,
in that estate? Wherefore do you not now place your self where you meane to aspire,
and save so much danger, so many hazards, and so great troubles as you enterpose
betweene both?’
Nimirum quia non bene norat quæ esset habendi
Finis, et omnino quoad crescat vera voluptas. -- Lucr. v. 1443.

The cause forsooth, he knew not what should be the end
Of leaving, nor how far true pleasure should extend.
I will conclude and shut up this treatise with an ancient verse, which I singularly
applaud and deem fit to this purpose.
Mores cuique sui fingunt fortunam. --Cic. Parad. v. Cor. Nep.
Ev’ry mans manners and his mind,
His fortune to him frame and find.



Return to


CHAPTER XLIII: OF SUMPTUARIE LAWES, OR LAWES FOR MODERATING OF
EXPENCES






CHAPTER XLIII: OF SUMPTUARIE LAWES, OR LAWES FOR MODERATING OF
EXPENCES
HE manner wherewith our Lawes assay to moderate the foolish and
vain expences of table-cheare and apparell seems contrary to its
end. The best course were to beget in men a contempt of gold and
silkwearinge as of vain and non-profitable things, whereas we
encrease their credit and price: a most indirect course to withdraw men
from them. As, for example, to let none but Princes eat dainties, or
weare velvets and clothes of Tissew, and interdict the people to do it,
what is it but to give reputation unto those things, and to encrease their longing to use
them? Let Kings boldly quit those badges of honor; they have many other besides: Such
excess is more excusable in other men than in Princes. We may, by the examples of
diverse Nations, learne sundrie better fashions to distinguish ourselves and our degrees
(which truly I esteeme requisit in an estate) without nourishing to that purpose this so
manifest corruption and apparant inconvenience. It is strange how custom in these

indifferent things does easily encroach and suddenly establish the footing of her authority.
We had scarce worne cloth one whole yeare at the Court, what time we mourned for our
King Henrie the second, but certainly in every mans opinion all manner of silks were
already become so vile and abject, that was any man seen to weare them he was presently
judged to be some countrie fellow or mechanicall man. They were left only for
Chyrurgians and Physitians. And albeit most men were apparreled likewise, yet were there
other sufficient apparant distinctions of mens qualities. How soone do plaine chamoy-
jerkins and greasie canvase doublets creepe into fashion and credit amongst our soldiers
if they lie in the field? And the garishnesse, neatnesse, and riches of silken garments grow
in contempt and scorne? Let Kings first begin to leave these superfluous expenses. We
shall all follow, and within a moneth, without edicts, ordinances, proclamations, and acts
of Parliament, it will be observed as a law. The statutes should speak contrary, as thus:
That no man or woman, of what quality soever, shall, upon pain of great forfeitures,
weare any manner of silke, of scarlet, or any goldsmiths work, except only Enterlude-
players, Harlots, and Curtizans. With such an invention did Zeleucus whilome correct the
corrupted manners of the Locrines. His ordinances were such: ’Be it enacted that no
woman of free condition shall have any more than one maid-servant to follow her when
she goeth abroad, except when she shall be drunken: And further, that she-may not go
out of the City by night, nor weare any jewels of gold or precious stones about her, nor
any gowne beset with goldsmiths work or enbroiderie, except she be a public- professed
whore: and moreover, that except panders and bawds, it shall not be lawfull for any man
to weare any gold-rings on his fingers, nor any rich garments, as are such of cloth made
in the City of Miletum.’ So did he by these reproachfull exceptions ingeniously drive his
Citizens from vain superfluities and pernicious dainties. It was a most profitable course,
by honor and ambition to allure men unto their dutie and obedience. Our Kings have the
power to addresse all these externall reformations. Their inclination serveth them as a law.
Quicquid Principes faciunt, præcipere videntur: ’Whatsoever Princes do, that they seem
to command.’ The rest of France takes the modell of the court as a rule unto itself to
follow. Let Courtiers first begin to leave off and loathe there filthy and apish breeches that
so openly show our secret parts: t he bumbasting of long pease-cod bellied doublets,
which makes us seem so far from what we are, and which are so cumbersome to arm:
These long, effeminate, and dangling locks: That foolish custom to kisse what we present
to others, and Beso las manos in saluting of our friends (a ceremony heretofore only due
unto princes): And for a gentleman to come to any place of respect, without his rapier by
his side, all unbraced, all untrust, as if he came from his close-stoole; And that against our
forefathers manner, and the particular liberty of our French nobility, we should stand
hare-headed, aloofe-off from them, wherever they be; and as about them, about many
others: So many petty-kings and petty-petty-kinglets have we now adayes: And so of other
like new-fangled and vicious introductions: They shall soone he seen to vanish and be
left. Although but superficiall faults, yet are they of evil presages. And we are warned
that the foundation or main summers of our houses faile and shrinke, when we see the
quarters bend or wals to breake. Plato in his Lawes, thinkes there is no worse plague, or
more pernicious in his City, than to suffer youth to have the reines of liberty in her own

hand, to change in their attires, in their gestures, dances, exercises, and songs, from one
form to another: And to remove their judgement, now to this, now to that place;
following newfangled devices, and regarding their inventors: By which old customs are
corrupted, and ancient institutions despised. In all things, except the wicked, mutation is to
be feared; indeed, even the alteration of seasons, of winds, of livings, and of humors. And
no laws are in perfect credit but those to which God has given some ancient
continuance: so that no man know their, of-spring, nor that ever they were other than they
are.



Return to


CHAPTER XLIV: OF SLEEPING






CHAPTER XLIV: OF SLEEPING
EASON does appoint us ever to walke in one path, but not alwaies to
keep one place: and that a wise man should not permit humane
passions to stray from the right carrier; he may (without prejudice unto
his dutie) also leave it unto them either to hasten or to slow his pace,
and not place himself in an immoveable and impassive Colossus.
Were virtue herself corporeall and incarnate, I think her pulse would
beat and work stronger, marching to an assault, than going to dinner: For it is necessarie
that she heat and move herself. I have therefore markt it as a rare thing to see great
personages sometimes, even in their weightiest enterprises and most important affairs,
hold themselves so resolutely-assured in their states that they do not so much as breake
their sleep for them. Alexander the Great, on the day appointed for that furious-bloudy
battle against Darius, slept so soundly and so long that morning, that Parmenion was faine
to enter his chamber, and approching near unto his bed, twice or thrice to call him by his
name, to awaken him, the hour of the battle being at hand, and urging him. Otho the
Emperor having determined to kill himself, the very same night, after he had given

order for his domestical affairs, shared his monie among his servants, and whetted the
edge of a sword, wherewith he intended to wound himself, expecting no other thing but
to know whether all his friends were gone to rest, fell into so sound a sleepe that the
groomes of his chamber heard him snort in another roome. This Emperours death has
many parts semblable unto that of great Cato, and namely this: For Cato being prepared to
defeat himself, while he expected to hear news whether the Senators, whom he
caused to retire were lanched out from the haven of Utica, fell so fast asleep that he was
heard to snort into the next chamber; and he whom he had sent toward the port having
waked him to tell him the storme was so rough that the Senators could not conveniently
put out to sea, he sent another, and lying down anew, fell a sleep again until the last
messenger assured him they were gone. We may also compare him unto Alexander in that
great and dangerous storme which threatned him, by the sedition of Metellus the Tribune,
who laboured to publish the decree of Pompeys re-appeall unto the City, together with his
army, at what time the commotion of Catiline was on foot: against which decree only
Cato did insist, and to that purpose had Metellus and he had many injurious speeches, and
menaced one another in the Senate-house: and it was the next day they were like to come
to the execution in the market-place, where Metellus, besides the favor of the common
people and of Cæsar, then conspiring and complotting for the advancement of Pompey
should come, accompanied with a multitude of strange and forraine slaves and fencers, to
do their utmost. And Cato, strengthened with his only constancy and with unmated
resolve: so that his kinsmen, his familiars, and many honest men took great care, and
were in heavy anxiety and pensivenesse for him: of which many never left him all night,
but sat up together without rest, eating, or drinking, by reason of the danger they saw
prepared for him; indeed, his wife and sisters did nought but weep and waile, and for his sake
torment themselves in their house, whereas contrariwise he alone conforted every body,
and blamed them for their demissenesse. And after he had supped (as he was wont) he
went quietly to his bed, and slept very roundly until the next morning, that one of his
copartners in the Tribune-ship came to call him to go to the skirmish. The knowledge we
have of this mans unmated-haughty heart by the rest of his life, may make us judge with
all securitie that it only proceeded from a spirit so far elevated above such accidents that
he dained not so much as to trouble his mind with them no more than with ordinary
chances. In the sea-fight which Augustus gained against Sextus Pompeius in Sicilie, ev en
at the instant he should go to fight, was surprised with so heavy a sleep that his friends
were compelled to awaken him to give the signall of the battle, which afterward gave
occasion unto Marcus Antonius to charge him with this imputation, that he had not dared
with open eyes to survey the marshalling of his army, and that his heart would not suffice
him to present himself unto his soldiers until such time as Agrippa brought him news of
the victory he had obtained of his enemies. But concerning young Marius, who
committed a greater error (for on the day of his last battle against Sylla, after he had
marshalled his army and given the word or signall of the battle) he lay down in the
shadow under a tree a while to rest himself, and fell so fast asleep that he could hardly be
waked with the rout and flight of his men, having seen no part of the fight, they say it
was because he was so exceedingly aggravated with travell, and over-tired with

weaknesse and want of sleep, that nature was overcome, and could no longer endure. And
touching this point, Phisitians may consider whether sleep be so necessarie that our life
must needs depend on it, for we find that Perseus King of Macedon, prisoner at Rome,
being kept from sleep, was made to die; but Plinie aleageth that some have lived a long
time without any sleep at all. And Herodotus reporteth there are nations where men sleep
and make by halfe years. And those that write the life of Epimenides the wise, affirm,
that he slept the continuall space of seven and fifty years.



Return to


CHAPTER XLV: OF THE BATTELL OF DREUX






CHAPTER XLV: OF THE BATTELL OF DREUX
HERE hapned diverse rare accidents and remarkable chances in our
battle of Dreux, but those who do not greatly favor the reputation of
the Duke of Guise do boldly aleage that he cannot be excused to have
made a stand and temporised with the forces he commanded, whilst the
Lord Constable of France, General of the Armie, was engaged and
suppressed with the enemies artillerie, and that it had been better for
him to hazard himself to charge the enemy flankwise, than by
expecting any advantage to have him come behind him, to suffer so reproachfull an
overthrow and so shamefull a loss. But omitting what the event thereof witnessed, he that
shall without passion debate the matter shall easily (in my conceit) confesse that the ayme
and drift, not only of a captaine, but of every particular souldier, ought chiefly to respect a
victory in great: and that no particular occurrences, of what consequence soever , or what
interest may depend on them, should ever divert him from that point. Philopoemen, in an
encounter with Machanidas, having sent before a strong troupe of archers and good marke
men to begin the skirmish, and the enemy, after he had put them to rout and disranked

them, ammusing himself in mainly pursuing them, and following the victory alongst the
main battle where Philopoemen was, although his soldiers were much moved and
offended to see their fellows put to the worst, he could not be moved to bouge from his
place, nor make head against his enemy to succour his men; but rather, having suffered
them to be defeated and cut in peecesbefore his face, began then to charge his enemies in
the battalion of their infanterie when he perceived them forsaken of their horsemen. And
albeit they were Lacedemonians, forasmuch as he charged them at what time (supposing
to have gained the day) they began to disorder themselves, he easily overcame them,
which done, he pursued Machanidas. This case is cousin-german unto that of the Duke of
Guise. In that sharpe-bloody battle of Agesilaus against Boeotians, which Xenophon (who
was there present) says to have been the hottest and rudest that ever he had seen,
Agesilaus refused the advantage which fortune presented him, to let the battallion of the
Bæotians pass, and to charge them behind, what certain victory soever he saw likely to
follow the same, esteeming that it were rather skill than valor; and to show his prowess
and matchlesse-haughty courage, chose rather to charge them in the front of their forces.
But what followed? He was well beaten and himself sore-hurt, and in the end compelled
to leave his enterprise and embrace the resolution which in the beginning he had refused,
causing his men to open themselves to give passage unto that torrent of the Boeotians who
when they were past through, perceiving them to march in disaray, as they who persuaded
themselves to be out of all danger, he pursued them and charged them flankwise. All
which notwithstanding, he could never put to rout or force them run-away, for they
orderly and fair and softly made their retreit, ever showing their face, until such time as
they got safely into their holds, and trenches.



Return to


CHAPTER XLVI: OF NAMES






CHAPTER XLVI: OF NAMES
HAT diversitie soever there be in herbs, all are shuffled up together
under the name of a sallade. Even so upon the consideration of names I
will here huddle up a gallymafry of diverse articles. Every several
nation has some names which, I wot not how, are sometimes taken in
ill part: as with us, Iacke, Hodge, Tom, Will, Bat, Benet, and so forth.
Item, it seems that in the genealogies of Princes there are certain
names fatally affected; as Ptolomeus with the Egyptians, Henries in
England, Charles in France, Baldwins in Flanders, and Williams in our ancient Aquitanie,
whence some say came the name of Guyenne; which is but a cold invention: As if in Plato
himself there were not some as harsh and ill-sounding. Item, it is an idle matter, yet
nevertheless, by reason of the strangenesse, worthy the memory, and recorded by an
ocular witness, that Henric Duke of Normandie, son to Henrie the second King of
England, making a great feast in France, the assembly of the Nobilitie was so great, that
for pastimes sake, being, by the resemblance of their names, divided into severall
companies: in the first were found a hundred and ten Knights sitting at one table and all
called Williams; besides private gentlemen and servants. It is as pleasant to distribute the
tables by the names of the assistants as it was unto Geta the Emperor, who would have all

his messes of dishes served in at his table orderly according the first letters of their names:
As, for example, those that began with P, as pig, pie, pike, puddings, pouts, proke,
pancakes, &amp;c. were all served in together; and so of all the rest. Item, it is a common
saying, ’That it is good to have a good name:’ As much to say, good credit or good
reputation. Yet verily it is very commodious to have a well-sounding and smooth name,
and which is easy to be pronounced, and facile to be remembered: For Kings, Princes,
Lords, and Magistrates know and remember us the better by them, and will not so soone
forget us. Marke but of those that serve and follow us, whether we do not more ordinarily
command and sooner employ such whose names come readier to our tongue or memory. I
have seen our King Henrie the second, who could never hit on the right name of a
Gentleman of Gascoigne, and did ever call a Lady waiting on the Queene by the general
surname of her house, because that of her father was so harsh and hard to be remembered.
And Socrates says: ’It ought to be a fathers speciall care to give his children good and
easy-sounding names.’ Item, it is reported that the foundation of our Lady, the great at
Poitiers had this beginning: ’A licentious young man having his dwelling-house where the
Church now standeth, had one night gotten a wench to lie with him, who so soone as she
came to bed, he demanded her name, who answered Marie: The young man hearing that
name, was suddenly so strucken with a motive of religion, and an awefull respect unto that
sacred name of the virgin Marie, the blessed mother of our Saviour and Redeemer, that he
did not only presently put her away from him, but reformed all the remainder of his
succeeding life: And that in consideration of this miracle there was first erected a chappell
in the place where this young mans house stood, consecrated unto that holy name, and
afterward the fair great Church which yet continueth.’ This vocal and auricular
correction, and so full of devotion, strucke right unto his soul. This other following, of
the same kind, insinuated itself by the corporall senses. Pythagoras being in companie
with two young men, whom he heard complot and consult ( being somewhat heated with
feasting and drinking) to go and ravish a chast-house, commanded immediately the
minstrels to change their tune; and so by a solemn, grave, severe, and spondaicall kind
of music, did sweetly inchaunt, allay, and in-trance their rash, violent, and law-less
lust. Item, shall not succeeding posterity say that our modern reformation has been
exact and delicate, to have not only oppugned and resisted errors and vices, and filled the
world with devotion, humility, obedience, peace, and every other kind of virtue, but
even to have combated their ancient names of baptisme, Charles, Lewis, Francis, to
people the world with Methusalem, Ezechiel, Malachie, much better feeling of a lively
faith? A Gentleman my neighbour esteeming the commodities of ancient times in regard
of our days, forgot not to sledge the fiercenesse and magnificence of the names of the
Nobilitie of those times, as Don Grumedan, Quedragan, and Agesilan: And that, but to
hear them sounded, a man might easily perceive they had been other manner of men than
Peter, Guilliam, or Michell. Item, I commend and am much beholding to Iames Amiot, in
the course of a French oration of his, to have still kept the full ancient Latine names,
without disguising or changing them, to give them a new French cadence. At the first they
seemed somewhat harsh unto the reader: but now, by reason of the credit which his
Plutarke has deservedly gotten amongst us, custom has removed all strangenesse from

us. I have often wished that those who write histories in Latine, would leave us our names
whole, and such as they are: For, altering VaudemontVallemontanus, and metamorphosing
them by muting them to the Greek or Latin tongue, we know not what to make of them,
and are often at a non-plus. To conclude my discourse: It is an ill custom, and of
exceeding bad consequence in our countrie of France, to call every man by the name of
his Town, Mannor, Hamlet, or Lordship, as the thing that does most confound houses,
and bring surnames out of knowledge. A cadet or yonger-brother of a good house, having
had for his appanage a Lordship, by whose name he has been known and honoured,
cannot well forsake and leave the same ten years after his death: his Lordship commeth
unto a stranger, who does the like: Ghesse then where we are, and how we shall do to
come to the perfect knowledge of these men. We need not go far for other examples, but
looke into our Royall house, where so many partages, so many surnames, and so many
severall titles have so encumbred us, that the originall of the stocke is utterly lost. There is
so much liberty in these mutations, that even in my time I have seen no man nor woman
advanced by fortune into some extraordinarie preferment, that has not immediately had
adjoined unto him or her genealogicall titles, new and unknown to their fathers, and that
has not been engraffed into some noble stocke or family. And as good lucke serveth, the
basest upstart and most obscure houses are most apt unto adulteration and falsification.
How many privat Gentlemen have we in FrancePeter or William that beareth the same
(marke it well, reader) and to whom it belongeth. Is not hope a courageous facultie, which
in a mortal subject, and in a moment, seeks to usurp infinitie and immensitie, and to
replenish his Masters indigence with the po esession of all things he can imagine or desire
before it would? Nature has given us a pleasant joy to play withall in that. Is it Peter or
William. And what is that but a word for al mouths? or three or foure dashes of a pen,
first, so easy to be varied, as I would willingly ask those whom the honor of so many
victories concerneth, or whether Guesquin, or Glesquin, or Gueaquin? yet were there
more apparence her than in Lucian that Σ did sue T. For, to which, according to their
accompt and blazoning of their gentrie, are of the royall house or race? I believe more
than others. Was it not prettily said, and with a good grace, by one of my friends? There
was a great companie banded together about a quarrell which a Gentleman had with
another, who in very truth had some prerogative of titles, honors, and alliances above the
common sort of Nobilitie; upon which word of his prerogative, every one seeking to
equall himself unto him, alleged, some one ofspring, some another, some the
resemblance of his name, some of his arms, othersome an old farfetcht pedigree, and the
meanest of them to be the great grandchild of some King beyond the seas. When they
came all to dinner, this man, whom hitherto they had all followed, in liew of takin g his
wonted place, making low lowting reverences, went to the lowest end of the board,
entreating the companie to hold him excused, that through rash-unadvisednesse he had
hitherto lived with them companion-like, but now being lately enformed of their right
qualities, he began to know them according to their ancient degrees, and that it did not
duly belong unto him to sit above so many Princes. And after he had acted his play, he
began to rail upon them with a thousand injuries; saying thus unto them: For the love of
God, content yourselves with what your forefathers have been contented, and with the

state whereto God has called us; we have sufficient if we can maintaine it well, let us not
disparage the fortune and condition of our predecessors, and reject we these foolish
imagitiations, which cannot faile any man, whatsoever he be, that is so imprudent as to
alleage them. Crests, Armes, and Coats have no more certaintie than surnames. I bear
Azure seme of trefoiles, a Lions Paw in fæce. Or armed Gules. What privilege has this
Coat, that it should for ever continue particularly to my house? A son in law will
transferre the same into another family: Some silly upstart purchaser of Armes will make
it his chief Coat. ’There is nothing wherein meet so many alterations and so much
confusion. But this consideration draweth me perforce unto another field. Let us
somewhat narrowly search into, and for God’s sake consider, on what foundation we
ground this glory and reputation, for which the world is turned topsie-turvie. On what do
we establish this transitorie renown, which with so great mind-possessing toyle and
industrie we seek and gape-after? In fine, it is
----- non levia aut ludicra petuntur Præmia: -- Vir. Æn. xii. 764.
No light prize, no reward in jest
Is hunted after as the best.
The wager goeth deepe: The question is, which letter must be paid with so many sieges,
battles, hurts, emprisonments, and services done unto the Crowne of France by her ever
renowned Constable. Nicholas Denisot has had no care but of the letters of his name, and
has changed all the contexture of them, thereout to frame the Earl of Alsinoss, whom he
has honoured and presenteth with the glory of his Poesie and Painting. And Suetonius
the historian has loved but the sense of his own, and having taken away Lenis, which
was his fathers surname, has left Tranquillus successor of his compositions reputation.
Who would believe Captain Bayard has no honor but that which he has borrowed from
the acts of Peter Terraill? And that Antonio Escalin (even before his eyes) suffered
Captain Poulin, and the Baron of La Garde, to steal so many Navigations, voyages, and
attempts, both by sea and land, from him? Secondarily, they are dashes and trickes of the
pen, common unto a thousand men. many are there in all races or families both of one
name and surname! And how many in diverse families, races, ages, and countries? Historie
has known three Socrates, five Platoes, eight Aristotles, seven Xenophons, twenty
Demetrius, twenty Theodores: besides which, imagine how many came not to her
knowledge. Who letteth my horse boy to call himself Pompey the great? But after all,
what means, what devices are there that annex unto my horse-keeper deceased, or to that
other who had his head cut off in Egypt, or that join unto them this glorified and
farrenowned word and these pen-dashes so much honoured, that they may thereby
advantage themselves?
Id cinerem et manes credis curare sepultos? -- IV 34.

Thinke you, ghosts buried, ashes dead,
Care much how we alive are sped?
What feeling motion of revenge have the two companions in chief valor amongst men:
Epaminondas of that glorious verse, which so many ages since is so common in our
mouthes for him?
Consiliis nostris laus est attrita Laconum. --Cic. Tusc. Qu. v.
By our complots the haught renown,
Of Spartan Gallants was brought down.
And Africanus of that other;
A sole exoriente supra Mæotis paludes
Nemo est, qui factis me æquiparare queat? --Ibid.
From Sun rise to the Scythian-lake, of fame
None in exploits can equalize my name.
Those that survive are tickled with the pleasure of these words, and by them solicited
with jealousie and desire, do presently without consideration transmit by fantasie this
their proper motion of revenge unto the deceased; and with a foolish-deceiving hope
persuade, themselves, when their turn commeth, to be capable of it. God he knowes it,
nevertheless:
----- ad hæc se
Romanus Graiusque et Barbarus Induperator
Erexit, causas dicriminis atque laboris
Inde habuit, tanto major famæ sitis est, quam
Virtutis.
-- Juv. Sat. x. 137.
Heerto himself the Roman General,
The Greek, the Barbarian, rouz’d and rais’d;
Here hence drew cause of perils, travells all:
So more, than to be good, thirst to be prais’d.


Renascence
Editions

Return to


CHAPTER XLVII. OF THE UNCERTAINTIE OF OUR JUDGEMENT.






CHAPTER XLVII. OF THE UNCERTAINTIE OF OUR JUDGEMENT.
T is even as that verse says,
’Επεων δε πολυς υοηος ευθα και ευθα.
Of words on either side,
A large doale they divide.
There is law sufficient to speak every where, both pro and contra. As for example:
Vince Hannibal, et non seppe usar’ poi
Ben la vittor iosa sua ventura. --Pet. Par. 1. son. lxxxvi. 1.

Hanniball conquer’d, but he knew not after
To use well his victorious good fortune.
He that shall take this part, and with our men go about, to make that over-sight prevaile,
that we did not lately pursue our fortune at Montcontour: Or he that shall accuse the King
of Spain, who could not use the advantage he had against us at Saint Quintin, may say
this fault to have proceeded from a mind drunken with his good fortune, and from a
courage ful-gorged with the beginning of good lucke; loses the taste how to encrease it,
being already hindred from digesting what he has conceived of it: He has his hands full,
and cannot take hold any more: Unworthy that ever fortune should cast so great a good
into his lap: For, what profit has he of it, if, notwithstanding, he give his enemy leisure
and means to recover himself? What hope may one have, that he will once more
adventure to charge these re-enforced und re-united forces, and new armed wit h despite
and vengeance, that durst not, or knew not how to pursue them, being dismaied and put to
rout?
Dum fortuna calet, dum conficit omnia terror. Lucan. vii. 734.
While fortune is at height in heat.
And terror worketh all by great.
But to conclude, what can he expect better than what he has lately lost? It is not, as at
Fence, where the number of venies given gets the victory: So long as the enemy is on
foot, a man is newly to begin. It is no victory, except it end the war. In that conflict
where Cæsar had the worse, near the City of Oricum, he reprochfully said unto Pompeis
soldiers, That he had utterly been overthrowne, had their Captain known how to
conquer, and paid him home after another fashion when it came to his turn. But why
may not a man also hold the contrary? That it is the effect of an insatiate and rash-
headlong mind, not to know how to limit or period his covetousnesse: That it is an abusing
of Gods favors to go about to make them lose the measure he has prescribed them, and
that anew to cast himself into danger after the victory, is once more to remit the same
unto the mercy of fortune: That one of the chiefest policies in militarie profession is not
to drive his enemy unto despaire. Silla and Marius in the social war, leaving
discomfited the Marsians, seeing one squadron of them yet on foot, which through
despaire, like furious beasts were desperately coming upon them, could not be induced
to stay or make head against them. If the fervor of Monsieur de Foix had not drewne him
over rashly and moodily to pursue the straglers of the victory at Ravenna, he had not
blemished the same with his untimely death; yet did the fresh-bleeding memory of his
example serve to preserve the Lord of Anguien from the like inconvenience at Serisoles. It
is dangerous to assaile a man whom you have bereaved of all other means to escape or
shift for himself but by his weapons; for necessitie is a violent school mistris, and which
teacheth strange lessons: Gravissimi stint morsus irritatæ necessitatis. ’No biting so

grievous as that of necessitie provoked and enraged.
Vincitur haud gratis jugulo qui provocat hostem. -- Lucan. iv. 278.
For nought you over-come him not,
Who bids his foe come cut his throat
And this is the reason why Pharax empeached the King of Lacedemon, who came from
gaining of a victory against the Mantinæans, from going to charge a thousand Argians,
that were escaped whole from the discomfiture; but rather to let them pass with all
liberty, lest he should come to make trial of provoked and despited virtue, through and
by ill fortune. Clodomire King of Aquitaine, after his victory, pursuing Gondemar King
of Burgundie, vanquished and running away, forced him to make a stand, and make head
again: but his unadvised wilfulnesse deprived him of the fruit of the victory, for he dyed
in the action. Likewise he that should chuse, whether it were best to keep his soldiers
richly and sumptuously armed, or only for necessitie, should seem to yield in favor of
the first, whereof was Sertorius, Philopoemen, Brutus, Cæsar, and others. urging that it is
ever a spur to honor and glory for a souldier to see himself gorgeously attired and
richly armed, and an occasion to yield himself more obstinate to fight, having the care to
save his arms, as his goods and inheritince. A reason (says Xenophon) why the Asiatikes
carried with them, when they went to wars, their wives and concubines; with all their
jewels and chiefest wealth. And might also encline to the other side, which is, that a man
should rather remove from his shoulder all care to preserve himself, than to increase it
unto him: for by that means he shall doubly fear to hazard or engage himself, seeing
these rich spoiles do rather increase an earnest desire of victory in the enemy: and it
has been observed that the said respect has sometimes wonderfully encouraged the
Romans against the Samnites. Antiochus shewing the army he prepared against them,
gorgeously accoutred with all pompe and statelinesse, unto Hanniball, and demanding of
him whether the Romanes would be contented with it: Yyea, verily, answered the other,
they will be very well pleased with it: They must needs be so, were they never so
covetous. Licurgus forbad his Soldiers, not only all manner of sumptuousnesse in their
equipage, but also to unease or strip their enemies when they overcame them, willing, as
he said, that frugality and povertie should shine with the rest of the battle. Both at sieges
and elsewhere, where occasion brings us near the enemy, we freely give our soldiers
liberty to brave, to disdaine, and injure him with all manner of reproaches: And not
without apparence of reason; for it is no small matter to take from them all hope of grace
and composition, in presenting unto them that there is no way left to accept it from him
whom they have so egregiously outraged, and that there is no remedie left but from
victory. Yet had Vitellius but had success in that; for, having to deale with Otho, weaker
in his soldiers valor, and of long disaccustomed from war, and effeminated through the
delights and pleasures of the City, himself in the end set them so on fire with his
reproachfull and injurious words, upbrayding them with their pusilanimitie and faint-
heartednesse, and with the regret of their ladies, banquettings and sensualities, which they

had left at Rome, that he put them into heart again, which no persuasions or other
means could do before; and thereby drew them, whom nought could have driven, to
fight and fall upon him. And verily, when they are injuries that touch a man to the quick,
they shall easily urge him, who was very backward to fight for his Kings quarrel, to be
very forward in his own cause or interest. If a man but consider of what consequence the
preservation and importance the safetie of a general is in an Armie, and how the enemies
chiefest ayme is at the fairest marke, which is the head, from which all other depend, it
seems that that counsell cannot be doubted of, which by sundrie great Chieftaines we
have seen put in practice, which is, in the beginning of the fight, or in the fury of the
battle, to disguise themselves. Notwithstanding the inconvenience a man may by this
means incur, is no less than that mischief which a man seeketh to avoid: For the
Captain being unseen and unknown of his soldiers, the courage they take by his
example, and the heart they keep by his presence, is therewithall impaired and diminished;
and losing the known ensignes and accustomed markes of their Leader, they either deem
him dead, or, dispairing of any good success, to be fled. And touching experience, we
sometimes see it to favor the one and sometimes the other partie. The accident of Pirrhus
in the battle he had against the Consull Levinus in Italie serveth us for both uses: For, by
concealing himself under the arms of Demagacles, and arming him with his own
indeed he saved his life, but was in great danger to fall into the other mischief, and lose
the day. Alexander, Cæsar, Lucullus, loved (at what time they were to enter fight) to arm
and attire themselves with the richest arms, and garish clothes they had, and of particular
bright-shining colours. Agis, Agesilaus, and that great Gilippus, contrairie, would ever go
to wars meanely accoutred, and without any imperiall ornament. Among other
reproaches that great Pompey is charged withall in the battle of Pharsalia, this is one
speciall, that he idlely lingred with his Armie, expecting what his enemy would attempt;
forasmuch as that (I will here borrow the very words of Plutarke, which are of more
consequence than mine) weakneth the violence that running gives the first bIowes, and
therewithall removeth the charging of the Combatants one against another, which more
than any other thing is wont to fill them with fury and impetuosity, when with vehemence
they come to enter-shocke one another, augmenting their courage by the crie and running;
and in a manner alayeth and quaileth the heat of Soldiers: See-here what he says
concerning this. But had Cæsar lost, who might not also have said, that contrariwise the
strongest and firmest situation is that wherein a man keeps his stand without budginge and
that who is settled in his march, closing, and against any time of need, sparing his strength
in himself, has a great advantage against him that is in motion and disordered; and that
running has already consumed part of his breath? Moreover, that an army being a body
composed of so many several parts, it is impossible it should in such fury advance itself
with so just a match, and proportioned a motion, and not breake and dis-rank, or at least
alter her ordinance, and that the nimblest be not grapling before his fellowes may helpe
him. In that drearie battle of the two Persian brethren, Clearchus the Lacedemonian, who
commanded the Græcians that followed, Cyrus his faction, let them faine and gently
without any halt-making to their charges, but when he came within fifty paces of his
enemies he had them with all speed to run unto it; hoping by the shortnesse of the distance

to manage their order and direct their breath; in the meane time giving them the advantage
of the impetuositie, both for their bodies and for their shooting-arms. Others have
ordered this doubt in their army after this manner: If your enemies headlong run upon you,
stay for them and bouge not: If they without stirring stay for you, run with fury upon
them.
In the passage which the Emperor Charles the fifth made into Provence, our King
Francis the first stood a good while upon this choice; whether it was best, by way of
prevention, to go and meet with him in Italie, or to stay his coming into France. And
albeit he considered what an advantage it is for one to preserve his house from the
troubles and mischiefes that war brings with it, to the end that, possessing her whole
strength, it may continually in all times of need store him with money, and supplie him
with all other helps; and considering how the necessity of direfull war does daily enforce
a General to make spoile of goods, and waste the Countrie, which cannot well be done in
our own goods and countrie: and that the countriman does not as patiently endure this
ravage at his friends hands as at his enemies, so as seditions may ensue amongst our onlie
factions, and troubles amongst our friends: That license to rob and spoile, which in his
countrie may not be to erated, is a great furtherance in a Souldier, and makes him the more
willing to endure the miseries and toylings that follow war: And what a hard matter it is
to keep the Souldier in office and heart, who has no other hope of profit but his bare pay,
and is so near his wife, his children, his friends, and his home: That he who layeth the
cloth is ever put to the greatest charges: That there is more pleasure in assailing than in
defending: And that the apprehension of a battle lost in our ow ne home and entrailes is
so violent, that it may easily shake the whole frame and distemper the whole body, seeing
there is no passion so contagious as that of fear nor so easy apprehended and taken a-
trust, or does more furiously possesse all parts of man: And that the Cities or Townes,
which have either heard the hustling noise of the tempest or seen the sparkles of this all-
consuming fire at their gates, or have perhaps received their Captains wounded, their
Citizens pursued, and their soldiers spoiled, and all out of breath, if they be not more
than obstinately constant, it is a thousand to one if in that brunt of fury they do not
headlong cast themselves into some desperate resolution. Yet did he conclude and chuse
this resolve for the best: First to revoke his forces he had beyond the Mountaines in Italie,
and so stay his enemies approaches. For he might, on the contrairie part, imagine that
being in his own countrie, and amidst good freinds, he had the better leisure io re-enforce
his decayed forces, and more opportunity to strengthen Townes, to munite Castles, to
store Rivers with all necessaries they wanted, and to keep all passages at his devotion,
which done, all the ways should be open for him, and might by them have all manner of
victuals, money, and other habilements of war brought him in safety, and without
convoy: that he should have his subjects so much the more affectionate unto him, by how
much nearer they should see the danger: That having so many Cities, Townes, Holds,
Castles, and Barres for his securitie, he might at all times, according to opportunity and
advantage, appoint and give Law unto the fight: And if he were pleased to temporize,
while he took his ease, kept his forces whole, and maintained himself in safetie, he
might see his enemy consume and waste himself by the difficulties which daily must

necessarily assault, environ, and combat him, as he who should be engaged in an enemy-
countrie and foe-land, where he should have nothing, nor meet with any thing, either
before or behind him, or of any side, that did not offer him continuall war: no way nor
means to refresh, to ease or give his army elbow-roome, if any sicknesse or contagion
should come amongst his men; nor shelter to lodge his hurt and maymed Soldiers: where
neither monie, munition, nor victuals might come unto him, but at the swords point; where
he should never have leisure to take any rest or breath; where he should have no
knowledge of places, passages, woods, foords, rivers, or countrie, that might defend him
from ambuscados or surprises: And if he should unfortunately chance to lose a battle, no
hope to save, or means to reunite the reliques of his forces. And there want not examples
to strengthen both sides. Scipio found it better for him to invade his enemies countrie of
Affrica, than to defend his own, and fight with him in Italie, where he was, wherein he
had good success. But contrariwise, Hanniball in the same war wrought his own
overthrow, by leaving the conquest of a forraine countrie for to go and defend his own.
The Athenians having left the enemy in their own land for to pass into Sicilie, had very
ill success, and were much contraried by fortune: whereas Agathocles, King of Siracusa,
prospered and was favoured by her, what time he passed into Affrica, and left the war on
foot in his own countrie. And we are accustomed to say with some show of reason, that
especially in matters of war the events depend (for the greatest part) on fortune: which
seldom will yield, or never subject herself unto our discourse or wisdom, as say these
ensuing verses:
Et male consultis pretium est, prudentia fallax,
Nec fortuna probat causas sequiturque merentes:
Sed vaga per cunctos nullo discrimine fertur:
Scilicet est aliud quod nos cogatque regatque
Majus, et in proprias ducat mortalia leges. --Manil. Astr. iv. 95.
’Tis best for ill advis’d, wisdom may faile,
Fortune proves not the cause that should prevaile,
But here and there without respect does saile,
A higher power forsooth us over-draws,
And mortal states guides with immortall laws.
But if it be well taken, it seems that our counsels and deliberations do as much depend
of her; and that fortune does also engage our discourses and consultations in her trouble
and uncertaintie. We reason rashly, and discourse at random, says Timeus in Plato: for
even as we, so have our discourses great participation with the temeritie of hazard.




Return to


CHAPTER XLVIII. OF STEEDS, CALLED IN FRENCH DESTRIERS






CHAPTER XLVIII.
OF STEEDS, CALLED IN FRENCH DESTRIERS
EHOLD, I am now become a Gramarian, I, who never learn’t tongue
but by way of roat, and that yet know not what either Adjective,
Conjunctions or Ablative meaneth. As far as I remember, I have
sometimes had certain horses which they call Funales, or Dextrarios,
which on the right hand were led by, as spare horses, to take them fresh
at any time of need and thence it commeth that we call horses of
service Destriers; and our ancient Romanes do ordinarily say to
Adexter, in steed of to accompanie. They also called Desultorios equos certain horses
that were so taught, that mainly-running with all the speed they had, joyning sides to one
another, without either bridle or saddle, the Roman gentlemen, armed at all assays, in the
middest of their running race would cast and recast themselves from one to another horse.
The Numidian men at arms were wont to have a second spare-horse led by hand, that in

the greatest fury of the battle they might shift and change horse: Quibus, desultorum in
modum, binos trahentibus equos, inter acerrimam sæpe pugnam in recentem equum ex
fesso armatis transsultare, mos erat. Tanta velocitas ipsis, tamque docile equorum genus
(Liv. Bel. Pun. dec. iii. 3.) Whose manner was as if they had been vaulters, leading two
horses with them in armour to leap from their tired horse to the fresh-one, even in the
hottest of the fight. So great agilitie was in themselves, and so apt to be taught was the
race of their horses. There are many horses found that are taught to helpe their master, to
run upon any man shall offer to draw a naked sword upon them; furiously to leap upon
any man, both with feet to strike and with teeth to bite, that shall affront them; but that for
the most part they rather hurt their friends than their enemies. Considering also, that if
they once be grapled, you cannot easily take them off and you must needs stand to the
mercy of their combat. Artibius, General of the Persian army had very ill luck to be
mounted upon a horse fashioned in this schoole, at what time he fought man to man
against Onesilus King of Salamis; for he was the cause of his death, by reason the
shieldbearer or squire of Onesilus cut him with a faulchon betweene the two shoulders,
even as he was leaping upon his master. And if that which the Italians report be true, that
in the battle of Fornovo, King Charles his horse, with kicking, winching, and flying, rid
both his master and himself from the enemies that encompast him, to dismount or kill
him, and without that, he had been lost: He committed himself to a great hazard, and
scap’t a narrow scowring. The Mammalukes boast that they have the nimblest and readiest
horses of any men at arms in the world. That both by nature they are instructed to
discerne, and by custom taught to distinguish their enemy, on whom they must leepe and
wince with feet and bite with teeth, according to the voice their master speaks or rider
gives them. And are likewise taught to take up from the ground, lances, darts, or any
other weapons with their mouths, and as he commandeth to present them to their rider. It
is said of Cæsar, and of Pompey the Great, that amongst their many other excellent
qualities, they were also most cunning and perfect horsemen; and namely of Cæsar, that
in his youth being mounted upon a horse, and without any bridle, he made him run a fall
cariere, make a sodaine stop, and with his hands behind his backe, performe what ever can
be expected of an excellent ready horse. And even as nature was pleased to make both him
and Alexander two matchlesse miracles in militarie profession, so would you say she has
also endevoured, indeed, enforced herself to arm them extraordinarily; For all men know
that Alexanders horse, called Bucephalus, had a head shaped like unto that of a bull; that
he suffered no man to get-on and sit him but his master; that none could weald and
manage him but he; what honors were done him after his death all know, for he had a
City erected in his name. Cæsar likewise had another who had his fore-feet like unto a
mans, with hoofs cloven in form of fingers, who could never be handled, drest, or
mounted but by Cæsar, who when he died dedicated his image to the Goddesse Venus. If I
be once on horse-backe, I alight very unwillingly; for it is the seat I like best, whether I be
sound or sicke. Plato commendeth it to be availefull for health: And Plinie affirmeth the
same to be healthfull for the stomacke and for the joints. And sithence we be falne into
this subject, let us a little follow it I pray you. We read of a law in Xenophon, by which all
men that either had or were able to keep a horse were expresly forbidden to travell and

go a foot. Trogus and Justinus report that the Parthians were not only accustomed to
war on horse-backe, but also to dispatch all their business, and negotiate their affairs,
both public and privat; as to bargaine, to buy, to sell, to parly, to meet, to entertaine one
another, and to converse and walke together; and that the chiefest difference betweene free
men and servants amongst them is that the first ever ride, and the other go alwaies on
foot: an institution first devised by King Cyrus. There are many examples in the Roman
histories (and Suetonius does more particularly note it in Cæsar) of Captains that
commanded their horsemen to alight whensoever by occasion they should be urged unto
it, thereby to remove all manner of hope from their Soldiers to save themselves by flight,
and for the advantage they hoped for in this manner of fight: Quo haud dubie superat
Romanus: (Liv. dec. 1. 3 & 7). Wherein undauntedly the Roman is superiour to all, says
Titus Livius: yet shall we see, that the first provision and chief means they used to bridle
rebellion amongst their new conquered nations was to deprive them of all arms and
horses. Therefore find we so often in Cæsar: Arma proferri, jumenta produci, obsides
dari jubat: (Cæs. Comment. vii.) He commands all their armour should be brought forth,
all their cattell should be driven out, and hostages should be delivered. The great Turke
does not permit, at this day, any Christian or Jew, to have or keep any horse for himself
throughout all his large empire. Our ancestors, and especially at what time we had wars
with the English, in all solemn combats or set battles, would (for the most part) alight
from their horses, and fight on foot, because they would not adventure to hazard so
precious a thing as their honor and life, but on the trust of their own proper strength and
vigor of their undanted courage, and confidence of their limbs. Let Chrisanthes in
Xenophon say what be pleaseth: whosoever fighteth on horse-backe engageth his valor
and hazardeth his fortune on that of his horse; his hurts, his stumbling, his death, draws
your life and fortune into consequence, if he chance to startle or be afraid, then are you
induced to doubt or fear: if to leape forward, then to become rash and foolhardy: if he
want a good mouth or a timely spurre, your honor is bound to answer for it. And
therefore do not I find it strange, that those combats were more firme and furious than
those which now we see fought on horse-backe.
-- cedebant pariter, pariterque ruebant
Victores, victique, neque his fuga nota, neque illis. Virg. Æn. x. 756.
The victors and the vanquisht both together
Gave backe, came on: the flight was known in neither.
Their battles are seen much better compact and contrived: they are now but bickerings
and routs: Primus clamor atque impetus rem decernit. The first shout and shocke makes
an end of the matter. And the thing we call to help us, and keep us company in so great
and hazardous an adventure, ought, as much as possible may be, lie still in our disposition
and absolute power. As I would counsell a gentleman to chuse the shortest weapons, and
such as he may best assure himself of: It is most apparant that a man may better assure
himself of a sword he holdeth in his hand, than of a bullet shot out of a pistoll, to which

belong so many severall parts, as powder, stone, locke, snap-hanse, harrell, stocke,
scowring-peece, and many others, whereof if the least faile, or chance to breake, and be
distempered, it is able to overthrow, to hazard, or miscarry your fortune. Seldome does
that blow come or light on the marke it is aymed at, which the air does carry.
Et quo ferre velint permittere vulnera ventis,
Ensis habet vires et gens guæcunque virorum est,
Bella gerit gladius. Lucan. viii, 384.
Giving winds leave to give wounds as they list,
But swords have strength, and right men never mist
With sword t’assault, and with sword to resist.
But concerning that weapon, I shall more amply speak of it where I will make a
comparison betweene ancient and modern arms: And except the astonishment and
frighting of the eare, which nowadaies is grown so familiar amongst men, that none does
greatly fear it; I think it to be a weapon of small effect, and hope to see the use of it
abolished. That wherewith the Italians were wont to throw with fire in it, was more
frightfull and terrour-moving. They were accustomed to name a kind of javelin,
Phalarica, armed at one end with an yron pike of three foot long, that it might pierce an
armed man through, which lying in the field they used to lanch or hurle with the hand, and
sometimes to shoot out of certain engines, for to defend besieged places: the staffe
whereof being wreath’d about with hemp or flax, all pitched and oiled over, flying in the
air, would soone be set afire, and lighting upon any body or target, deprived the partie
hit therewith of all use of weapons or limbs: Me thinkes nevertheless, that coming to
grapple, it might as well hinder the assailant as trouble the assailed, and that the ground
strewed with such burning truncheons, might in a pell-mell confusion produce a common
incommoditie.
----- magnum stridens contorta phalarica venit
Fulminis acta modo. -- Virg. Æn. ix. 705.
With monstrous buzzing came a fire-dart thirled
As if a thunder-bolt had there been whirled.
They had also other means, to the use of which custom enured them, and that by reason
of inexperience seem incredible to us: wherewith they supplied the defect of our powder
and bullets. They with such fury darted their Piles, and with such force hurled their
javelins, that they often pierced two targets and two armed men through, as it were with a
spit. They hit as sure and as far with their slings as with any other shot. Saxis globosis
funda, mare apertum incessentes. . . coronas modici circuli magno ex intervallo loci
assueti trajicere: non capita modo hostium vulnerabant, sed quem locum destinassent Liv.

dec. iv. 8). While they were boyes, with round stones in a sling, making ducks and drakes
upon the sea, they accustomed to cast through round marks of small compasse a great
distance off: whereby they not only hit and hurt the heads of their enemies; but woufd
strike any place they aymed at. Their battering or murthering peeces represented as well
the effect as the clattering and thundering noise of ours: ad ictus mænium cum terribili
sonitu editos, pavor el trepidatio cepit; At the battery of the walles made with a terrible
noise, fear an d trembling began to attach them within. The Gaules, our ancient
forefathers in Asia, hated mortally such treacherous and flying weapons, as they that were
taught to fight hand to hand, and with more courage. Non tam patentibus plagis moventur,
- ubi latior quam altior plaga est, etiam gloriosius se pugnare putant; iidem quum aculeus
sagittæ, aut glandis abdita, introrsus tenui vulnere in speciem urit; tum in rabiem et
pudorem tam parvæ perimentis pestis versi, prosternunt corpora humi (Liv. dec. iv. 8).
They are not so much moved with wide gashes, where the wound is more broad than it is
deepe, there they think that they fight with more bravery; but when the sting of an arrow
or a bullet, with a small wound to show, gals them inwardly, then falling into rage and
shame that so slight a hurt should kill them, they cast their bodies on the ground.
A model or picture very near unto an harquebusada. The ten thousand Græcians in their
long-lingring and far-famous retreat, encountered with a certain nation, that exceedingly
much endomaged them with stiffe, strong, and great [bowes], and so long arrows, that
taking them up, they might throw them after the manner of a dart, and with them pierce a
target and an armed man through and through. The engines which Dionysius invented in
Siracusa, to shoot and cast mightie big arrows, or rather timber-peaces, and huge-great
stones, so far and with such force, did greatly represent and come very near our modern
invention. We may not also forget the pleasant seat which one named Master Peter Pol,
doctor in divinitie, used to sit upon his mule, who, as Monstrelet reporteth, was wont to
ride up and down the streets of Paris, ever sitting sideling, as women use. He also says
in another place, that the Gascoines had certain horses, so fierce and terrible, taught to
turn and stop suddenly in running, whereat the French, the Piccards, the Flemmings, and
Brabantins (as they who were never accustomed to see the like) were greatly amazed, and
thought it a wonder: I use his very words. Cæsar, speaking of those of Swethen, saithe In
any skirmish or fight on horsebacke, they often alight to combat on foot, having so trained
and taught their horses, that so long as the fight lasteth they never bouge from their
masters side, that if need require, they may suddenly mount up again: and according to
their natural custom, there is nothing accounted more base or vile than to use saddles or
bardels, and they greatly contemne and scorne such as use them: So that a few of them
fear not to encounter with a troupe far exceeding them in number. That which I have
other times wondered at, to see a horse fashioned and taught, that a man having but a
wand in his hand, and his bridle loose hanging over his ears, might at his p leisure
manage, and make him turn, stop, run, carrie, trot, gallop, and whatever else may be
expected of all excellent ready horse, was common amongst the Massilians, who never
used either bridle or saddle.
Et gens que nudo residens Massilia dorso,

Ora levi flectit, froenorum nescia, virga. --Lucan. iv. 681.
Massilian horsemen on bare horse-backe sit
Manage with light rod, without reynes or bit.
Et Numidæ infroeni cingunt. -- Virg. Æn. iv. 41.
Numidians who their horses ride
Without bit, round about us bide.
Equi sine froenis, deformis ipse cursus rigida cervice et extento capite currentiam: The
horses being without bridles, their course is ill favoured, they running with a stiffe necke,
and outstretcht head (like a roasted Pigge:) Alphonsus, King of Spain that first
established the order of Knights called the order of the Bend or skarfe, amongst other
rules devised this one, that none of them, upon pain to forfeit a marke of silver for every
time offending, should ever ride either mule or mulet; as I lately read in Guevaras epistles,
of which. whosoever called them his golden epistles gave a judgment far different from
mine. The Courtier says, That before his time it was counted a great shame in a
gentleman to be seen riding upon a mule: Whereas the Abyssines are of a contrary
opinion, who accordingly as they are advanced to places of honor or dignitie about their
Prince, called Prester-John, so do they more and more affect, in signe of pompe and state,
to ride upon large-great mules. Xenophon reporteth that the Assirians were ever wont to
keep their horses fast-tied in fetters or gyves, and ever in the stable, they were so wild
and furious. And for that they required so much time to unshackle, and to harnish them
(lest protracting of so long time might, if they should chance at unawares, and being un
ready, to be surprised by their enemies, endomage them) they never took up their quarter
in any place except it were well dyked and intrenched. His Cirus, whom he maketh so
cunning in horsemanship, did always keep his horses at a certain stint, and would never
suffer them to have any meat before they had deserved the same by the sweat of some
exercise. If the Scithians in time of war chanced to be brought to any necessitie of
victuals, the readiest remedy they had was to let their horses blood, and therewithall
quenched their thirst and nourished themselves.
Venit et epoto Sarmata pastus equo. --Mart. Spect. iii. 4.
The Scithian also came, who strangely feedes
On drinking out his horse (or that he bleedes).
Those of Crotta being hardly besieged by Metellus, were reduced to so hard a pinch and
strait necessitie of all manner of other beverage, that they were forced to drinke the stale
or urine of their horses. To verifie how much better cheape the Turkes do both levie,
conduct, and maintaine their armies than we Christians do, they report that besides their

soldiers never drinke any thing but water, and feed on nothing but rice and drie salt flesh,
which they reduce into a kind of powder (whereof every private man does commonly
carry so much about him as will serve for a months provision), and for a shift will live a
long time with the blood of their horses, wherein they use to put a certain quantitie of
salt, as the Tartars and Moskovites do. These new discovered people of the Indies, when
the Spaniards came first amongst them, esteemed that as well men as horses were either
gods or creatures far beyond and excelling their nature in nobility. Some of which, after
they were vanquished by them, coming to sue for peace and beg pardon at their hands,
to whom they brought presents of gold and such viand’s as their countrie yielded, omitted
not to bring the same and as much unto their horses, and with as solemn oration as they
had made unto men, taking their neighings as a language of truce and composition. In the
[he]ther Indies the chief and royallest honor was anciently wont to be to ride upon an
elephant; the second to go in coaches drawne with foure horses; the third to ride upon a
camell; the last and basest was to be carried or drawne by one horse alone. Some of our
modern writers report to have seen some countries in that climate where the people ride
oxen, with packe-saddles, stirrops, and bridles, by which they were carried very easily.
Quintus Fabius Maximus Rutilianus, warring against the Samnites, and seeing that his
horsemen in three or foure charges they gave had missed to breake and run through his
enemies battalion, at last resolved thus, that they should all unbridle their horses, and with
main force of sharpe spurres pricke and broach them; which done, the horses, as enraged,
took such a running through, and athwart the enemies camp, arms and men, that nought
was able to resist them, and with such a fury that by opening, shouldering, and
overthrowing the battalion, they made way for his infanterie, which there committed a
most bloody slaughter, and obtained a notable victory. The like was commanded and
effected by Quintus Fulvius Flaccus against the Celtiberians: Id cum majore vi equorum
facietis, si effrænatos in hostes equos immittitis; quod stæpe Romanos equites cum laude
fecisse sua, memoriæ proditum est. Detractisqu e frænis bis ultro citroque cum magna
strage hostium, infractis omnibus hastis, transcurrerunt:(Liv. dec. iv. 10). That shall you
do with more violence of horse if you force your horse unbridled on the enemy, which it
is recorded the Roman horsemen have often performed with great proofe and praise. So
pulling off the bridles they twice ran through forward and backe again with great
slaughter of the enemy, all their launces broken.
The Duke of Moscovie did anciently owe this reverence unto the Tartars, at what time
soever they sent any Ambassadors to him, that he must go meet them on foot, and
present them with a goblet full of mares-milke (a drinke counted very delicious amongst
them) which whilst they were drinking, if any drop chanced to be spilt upon their horses
haires, he was by dutie hound to licke the same up with his tongue. The army which the
Emperor Bajazeth had sent into Russia, was overwhelmed by so horrible a tempest of
snow that to find some shelter, and to save themselves from the extremity of the cold,
many advised to kill and unpanch their horses and enter into their panches to enjoy and
find some ease by that vital heat. Bajazeth after that bloudy and tragical conflict wherein
he was overthrowne by the Scithian Tamburlane in seeking to escape, had no doubt saved
himself by the swiftnesse of an Arabian mare on which he was mounted that day, if

unluckily he had not been forced to let her drinke her fill in passing over a river, which
made her so faint and floundered that he was easily overtaken and apprehended by those
that pursued him. The common saying is, that to let a horse stale after a full cariere does
take down his speed, but I would never had thought that drinking had done it, but rather
strengthened and heartned him.
Croesus passing alongst the citie of Sardis found certain thickets, wherein were great
store of snakes and serpents, on which his horses fed very hungerly, which thing, as
Herodotus says, was an ill-boding prodigy unto his affairs. We call him an entire horse
that has his full main and whole ears, and which in show, or at a muster, does not
exceed others. The Lacedemonians having defeated the Athenians in Sicilie, returning in
great pompe and glory from the victory into the citie of Siracusa, among other bravadoes
of theirs, caused such horses as they had taken from their enemies to be shorne all over,
and so led them in triumph. Alexander fought with a nation called Dahas, where they went
to war two and two, all armed, upon one horse, but when they come to combat one must
alight, and so successively one fought on foot and the other on horsebacke, each in his
turn one after another. I am persuaded that in respect of sufficiencie, of comlinesse, and
of grace on horseback no nation goeth beyond us. A good horse-man (speaking according
to our phrase) seems rather to respect an undismayed courage than an affected clean
seat. The man most skilfull, best and surest-fitting, comeliest-graced, and nimblest-
handed, to sit, to ride, and mannage a horse cunningly that ever I knew, and that best
pleased my humor, was Monsieur de Carnavalet, who was Master of the Horse unto our
King Henry the second. I have seen a man take his full cariere, standing boult up-right on
both his feet on the saddle, leap down to the ground from it, and turning backe take off
the saddle, and presently set it on again as fast as ever it was, and then leap-into it again,
and al this did he whilst his horse was running as fast as might be with his bridle on his
necke. I have also seen him ride over a bonnet or cap, and being gone a good distance
from it, with his bow shooting backward, to sticke many arrows in the same; then sitting
still in the saddle to take up any thing from the ground, to set one foot to the ground and
keep the other in the stirrop, and continually running do a thousand such tumbling and
apish tricks, wherewith he got his living. There have in my time two men been seen in
Constantinople, both at once upon one horse, and who in his speediest running would by
turnes, first one and then another, leape down to the ground and then into the saddle
again, the one still taking the others place. And another who only with teeth, and without
the helpe of any hand, would bridle, currie, rub, dresse, saddle, girt, and harnish his horse.
Another that betweene two horses, and both saddled, standing upright with one foot in the
one and the second in the other, did bear another man on his arms standing upright, run
a full speedy course, and the uppermost to shoot and hit any marke with his arrows.
Divers have been seen who, standing on their heads and with their legs ourstretched
aloft, having many sharp. pointed cimitaries fastened round about the saddle, to gallop at
full speed. While I was a young lad, I saw the Prince of Sulmona at Naples manage a
young, a rough and fierce horse, and show all manner of horsemanship; to hold testons or
reals under his knees and toes so fast as if they had been nayled there, and all to show his
sure, steady, and unmoveable sitting.




Return to
Renascence
Editions







CHAPTER XLIX.
OF ANCIENT CUSTOMES
WOULD willingly excuse our people for having no other patterne or
rule of perfection, but his own customs, his own fashions: For, it is a
common vice, not only in the vulgar sort, but as it were in all men, to
bend their ayme, and frame their thoughts unto the fashions wherein
they were borne. I am pleased when he shall see FabriciusLælius, who,
because they are neither attired nor fashioned according to our manner,
that he condemne their countenance to be strange and their cariage barbarous. But I
bewaile his particular indiscretion, in that he suffereth himself to be so blinded and
deceived by the authority of present custom, and that if custom pleaseth he is ready to
change opinion and varie advice, every moneth, nay every day, and judgeth so diversly of
himself. When he wore short-wasted doublets, and but little lower than his breast, he
would maintaine by militant reasons that the waste was in his right place: but when not
long after he came to weare them so long-wasted, indeed almost so low as his privates, than
began he to condemne the former fashion, as foolish, intolerable and deformed; and to
commend the latter as comely, handsome, and commendable. A new fashion of apparel

creepeth no sooner into use but presently he blameth and dispraiseth the old, and that with
so earnest a resolution and universall a consent, that you would say, it is some kind of
madnesse or self-regarding humor that giddieth his understanding. And forasmuch as our
changing or altering of fashion is so sudden and new-fangled, that the inventions and new
devices of all the tailors in the world cannot so fast invent novelties, it must necessarily
follow that neglected and stale rejected fashions do often come into credit and use again:
And the latest and newest within a while after come to be outcast and despised, and that
one self-same judgment within the space of fifteene or twentie years admitteth not only
two or three different, but also cleane contrary opinions, with so light and incredible
inconstancie, that any man would wonder at it. There is no man so suttle-crafty amongst
us, that suffereth not himself to be enveigled and over-reached by this contradiction, and
that is not insensibly dazeled both with his inward and externall eyes. I will here huddle-
up some few ancient fashions that I remember: Some of them like unto ours, othersome
far differing from them: To the end, that having ever this continuall variation of humane
things in our mind, we may the better enlighten and confirme our transported judgment.
That manner of fight which we use now adaies with rapier and cloke, was also used
among the Romanes, as says Cæsar: Sini stras sagis involvunt, gladiosque distringunt:
(Cæs. Bel. Civ. i.) they wrap their left arms in their clokes, and draw their swords. We
may to this day observe this vice to be amongst us, and which we have taken from them,
that is, to stay such passengers as we meet by the way, and force them to tell us who they
are, whence they come, whither they go, and to count it as an injurie and cause of
quarrell they refuse to answer our demand. In Baths, which our forefathers used daily
before meals, as ordinarily as we use water to wash our hands, when first they came into
them they washed but their arms and legs, but afterward (which custom lasted many
after-ages, and to this day continueth amongst diverse nations of the world) their whole
body over with compounded and perfumed waters, in such sort as they held it as a great
testimony of simplicitie to wash themselves in pure and uncompounded water: Such as
were most delicate and effeminate were wont to perfume their whole bodies over and
over, three or four times every day: And often (as our French women have lately taken up)
to picke and snip out the haires of their fore-head, so they of all their body. or
Quod pectus, quod crura ubi, quod brachia vellis. Mart. ii. Epig. lxii. 1.
That you from breast, legs, arms, the hair
Neatly pull off (to make them fair).
Although they had choice of ointments fit for the purpose.
Psilotro nitet, aut arida latet abdita creta. Lib. vi. Epi. xciii. 9.
She shines with ointments that make hair to fall.
Or with dry chalke she over-covers all.

They loved to lie soft, and on fine down beds, aleaging lying on hard mattresses as a
signe of patience. They fed lying on their beds, near after the manner of the Turks
nowadaies,
Inde thoro pater æneas sic orsus ab alto. --Virg. Æn. ii.2.
Father Æneas thus gan say,
From stately couch where then he lay.
And it is reported of Cato Junior that after the battle of Pharsalia, and that he began to
mourne and bewaile the miserable state of the common-wealth, and ill condition of
public affairs, he ever eat sitting on the ground, following an austere, and observing a
strict kind of life. The Beso las manos was used as a signe of honor and humility only
towards great persons. If friends met, after friendly salutations they used to kisse one
another, as the Venetians do at this day.
Gratatusque darem cum dulcibus oscula verbis. Ovid. Pont. iv. El. ix. 13.
Give her I would with greetings graced,
Kisses with sweet words enterlaced.
And in saluting or suing to any great man they touched his knees, Pasicles the
philosopher, brother unto Crates, coming to salute one, whereas he should have carried
his hand to his knee, carried the same unto his genitories: The partie saluted having
rudely pusht him away, What, quoth he, is not that part yours as well as the other? Their
manner of feeding was as ours, their fruit last. They were wont to wipe their tailes (this
vain superstition of words must be left unto women) with a sponge, and that’s the reason
why Spongia in Latine is counted an obscene word: which sponge was ever tied to the end
of a gaffe, as witnesseth the story of him that was carried to be devoured of the wild
beasts before the people, who desiring leave to go toe a privie before his death, and
having no other means to kill himself, thrust down the sponge and staffe he found in
the privie into his throte wherewith he choked himself. Having ended the delights of
nature, they were wont to wipe their privities with perfumed wooll.
At ubi nil faciam, sed lota memtula lana. Mart. xi. Epig. li. 11.
To you no such thing will I bring,
But with washt wooll another thing.
In every street of Rome were placed tubs and such other vessels, for passengers to make
water in.

Pusi seape lacum propter, se dolia curta
Somno devincti credunt extollere vestem. Lucr. iv. 1018.
Children asleepe oft think they take up all
Neere to some pissing tub, some lake, some wall.
They used to break their fast, and nonchion between meals, and all summer-time had
men that sold snowe up and down the streets, wherewith they refreshed their wines, of
whom some were so daintie that all winter long they used to put snow into their wine, not
deeming it cold enough. Principall and noble men had their cup bearers, tasters, carvers,
and buffons to make them merry. In Winter their viandes were brought and set on the
boord upon arches, as we use chafing dishes; and had portable kitchens (of which I have
seen some) wherein might be drawne wherever one list a whole service and messe of
meat.
Has vobis epulas habete, lauti.
Nos offendimur ambulante cæna. Mart. vii. Epig. xlvii. 5.
Take you daintie mouth’d such stirring feasts
With walking meales we are offended guests.
And in summer they often caused cold water (being carried through pipes) to drill upon
them as they sate in their dining chambers, or lowe parlors, where in cisterns they kept
store of fish alive, which the by-standers might at their pleasure chuse and take with their
hands, and have it drest every man according to his fantasie. Fish has ever had this
privilege, as at this day it has, that chief gentlemen are pleased and have skill to dress it
best: And to say truth, the taste of fish is much more delicat and exquisit than that of flesh,
at least in mine. But in all manner of magnificence, delitiousnes, riotous gluttonie,
inventions of voluptuoushes, wantonnes, and sumptuositie, we truly endeavor, as much as
may be, to equall and come near them: For our will and taste is as much corrupted as
theirs, but our skill and sufficiencie is far short of them: Our wit is no more capable,
and our strength no more able to approach and match them in these vitious and blame-
worthy parts than in vertuous and commendable actions: For both proceede from a vigor
of spirit and far-reaching wit, which, without comparison, was much greater in them
than now in us. And mindes by how much more strong and excellent they are, so much
less facultie and means have they to do, either excellently well or notoriously ill. The
chiefest aime amongst them was a meane or mediocrity. The Foremost or Last, in writing
or speaking, had no signification of preheminence or greatness, as may evidently appeare
by their writings. They would familiarly and as soon say, Oppius and Cæsar, as Cæsar
and Oppius; and as indifferently I and you, as you and I. And that’s the reason why I
have heretofore noted in the life of Flaminius, in our French Plutarke, a place where it
seems that the Author, speaking of the jealousie of glory that was between the Ætolians

and the Romans, for the gain of a battle, which they had obtained in common, maketh
for the purpose, that in Greeke songs the Ætolians were named before the Romans, except
there be some Amphibology in the French words: for in that toung I read it. When
Ladies came unto stoves or hot-houses, they made it not daintie to admit men into their
companie, and to be washed, rubbed, chafed, and annointed by the hands of their groomes
and pages.
Inguina succinctus nigra ubi servus aluta
Stat, quoties calidis nuda foveris æquis. -- Epig. xxxiv. 1.
Your man, whose loynes blacke-lether girds, stands by, Whilst in warme
water you stark-naked lie.
They also used to sprinkle themselves all over with certain powders, thereby to allay and
represse all manner of filth or sweat. The ancient Gaules (says Sidonius Apollinaris )
wore their hair long before, and all the hinder part of their head shaven, a fashion that
our wanton youths and effeminate gallants have lately renued, and in this new-fangled
and fond-doting age, brought up again, with wearing of long-dangling locks before. The
ancient Romans paid the water-men their fare or due so soone as they came into the boat,
whereas we pay it when they set us on shore.
-- dum as exigitur, dum mula ligature
Tota abit hora.
While they call for their fare, tie drawe-mule to,
There runs away a full hour, if not two.
Women were wont to lie on the utmost side of the, bed, and therefore was Cæsar called
Spondam Regis Nicomedis:3 ’King Nicomedes his beds side.’ They took breath while they
were drinking, and used to baptise or put water in their wines.
-- quis puer ocius
Restinguit ardentis falerni
Pocula prætereunte limpha? --Hor. ii.Od. xi. 18.
What boy of mine or thine
Shall coole our cup of wine
With running water fine?
Those cousening and mind-deceiving countenances of lakeis were also amongst them.
O Jane, a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit,

Nec manus auriculas imitata est mobilis albas,
Nec lingæ quantum sitiet canis Apula tantum.
O Janus, whom behinde no Storks-bill does deride,
Nor nimble hand resembling mak’st ears white and wide,
Nor so much tongue lil’d out as dogges with thirst ore-dride.
The Argian and Roman Ladies mourned in white, as our dames wont to do, and if I
might be credited, and bear-sway amongst them, they should continue it still. But
because there are many bookes that treat of this argument, I will say no more of it.



Return to


CHAPTER L. OF DEMOCRITUS AND HERACLITUS






CHAPTER L. OF DEMOCRITUS AND HERACLITUS
UDGEMENT is an instrument for all subjects, and meddles every
where, and therefore the Essayes I make of it, there is no manner of
occasion I seek not to employ therein. If it be a subject I understand not
my self, therein I make trial of it, sounding afarre off the depth of the
ford, and finding the same over deepe for my reach, I keep my self
on the shoare. And to acknowledge not to be able to wade through is a
part of its effect, indeed of such whereof he vanteth most. If I light upon a vain and idle
subject, I assaye to trie and endeavor to see whether I may find a good ground to work
upon, and matter to frame a body, and wherewith to build and under-lay it. Sometimes I
addresse my judgement and contrive it to a noble and out- worn subject, wherein is
nothing found subsisting of itself, the high way to it being so bare-trodden that it cannot
march but in other steps. There he pleaseth himself in chusing the course he thinkes best,
and a thousand paths sometimes he says, this or that was best chosen. I take my first
Argument of fortune: All are likewise unto me: And I never purpose to handle them

throughly: For there is nothing wherein I can perceive the full perfection: Which they do
not that promise to show it us. Of a hundred parts and visages that every thing has, I take
one, which sometimes I slightly run over, and other times but cursorily glance at. And
yet other whilst I pinch it to the quick and give it a Stockado, not the widest, but the
deepest I can. And for the most part I love to seize upon them by some unwonted lustre. I
would adventure to treat and discourse of some matter to the depth; knew I my self less,
or were I deceived in my own impuissance; scattering here one and there another word,
scantlings taken from their main groundwork, disorderly dispersed without any well-
grounded designe and promise. I am not bound to make it good, nor without varying to
keep my self close-tied unto it; whensoever it shall please me to yield my self to
doubt, to uncertaintie, and to my Mistris’s form, which is ignorance. Each motion
sheweth and discovereth what we are. The very same mind of Cæsar we see in directing,
marshalling, and setting the battle of Pharsalia, is likewise seen to order, dispose, and
contrive idle, trifling and amorous devices. We judge of a horse not only by seeing him
ridden, and cunningly managed, but also by seeing him trot or pace; indeed, if we but looke
upon him as he stands in the stable. Amongst the functions of the soul, some are but
meane and base. He that seeth her no further, can never know her thorowly. And he that
seeth her march her natural and simple pace, does perhaps observe her best. The
winds or passions take her most in her highest pitch, seeing she entirely coucheth herself
upon every matter, and wholy therein exerciseth herself: and handleth but one at once,
not according to it, but according to herself. Things severall in themselves have
perhaps weight, measure, and condition: But inwardly, in us, she cuts it out for them,
as she understandeth the same herself. Death is fearefull and ugly unto Cicero; wished
for and desired of Cato; and indifferent unto Socrates. Health, wellfare, conscience,
authority, riches, glory, beautie, and their contraries are dispoyled at the entrance, and
receive a new vesture at the soules hand. Yea, and what coulour she pleaseth: browne,
bright, greene, sad, or any hew else; sharpe or sweet, deepe or superficiall, and what each
of them pleaseth. For none of them did ever verifie their stiles, their rules, or formes in
common; each one severally is a Queene in her own estate. Therefore let us take no more
excuses from externall qualities of things. To us it belongeth to give ourselves accoumpt
of it. Our good and our evil has no dependancy but from ourselves. Let us offer our
vows and offerings unto it, and not to fortune. She has no power over our manners. Why
should I not judge of Alexander as I am sitting and drinking at table, and talking in good
company? Or if he were playing at Chesse, what string of his wit does not tone or harpe
on this fool-childish and time-consuming play? I lothe and shun it, only because there is
no sport enough in it, and that in his recreation he is over serious with us, being ashamed I
must apply the attention therunto as might be employed on some good subject. He was no
more busied in levying his forces and preparing for his glorious passage into India; nor
this other in disintangling and discovering of a passage whence dependeth the well-fare
and safety of mankind. See how much our mind troubleth this ridiculous ammuzing, if all
her sinnewes bandy not. How amply she gives every one Law in that to know and
directly to judge of himself. I do not more universally view and feel my self in any
other posture. What passion does not exercise us therunto. Choller, spight, hatred,

impatience, and vehement ambition to overcome, in a matter wherein it were perhaps more
excusable to be ambitious for to be vanquished. For a rare pre-excellence, and beyond the
common reach, in so frivolous a thing, is much mis-seeming a man of honor. What I say
of this example may be spoken of all others. Every parcell, every occupation of a man,
accuses and sheweth him equal unto another. Democritus and Heraclitus were two
Philosophers, the first of which, finding and deeming humane condition to be vain and
ridiculous, did never walke abroad but with a laughing, scorneful and mocking
countenance: Whereas Heraclitus, taking pity and compassion of the very same condition
of ours, was continually seen with a sad, mournful, and heavy cheere, and with tears
trickling down his blubbered eyes.
-- Alter
Ridebat quoties a limine moverat unum
Protuleratque pedem, flebat contrarius alter. Juven. Sat. x. 28.
One from his doore, his foote no sooner past,
But straight he taught; the other wept as fast.
I like the first humor best, not because it is more pleasing to laugh than to weepe; but
for it is more disdainfull, and does more condemne us than the other. And me thinkes we
can never be sufficiently despised according to our merit. Bewailing and commiseration
are commixed with some estimation of the thing moaned and wailed. Things scorned and
contemned are thought to be of no worth. I cannot be persuaded there can be so much ill
lucke in us as there is apparant vanity, nor so much malice as sottishnesse. We are not so
full of evil as of voydnesse and inanitie. We are not so miserable as base and abject. Even
so Diogenes, who did nothing but trifle, toy, and dally with himself, in rumbling and
rowing of his tub, and flurting at Alexander, accompting us but flies and bladders puft
with winde, was a more sharpe, a more bitter, and a more stinging judge, and by
consequence more just and fitting my humor than Timon, surnamed the hater of all
mankinde. For looke what a man hateth, the same thing he takes to hart. Timon wisht all
evil might light on us: He was passionate in desiring our ruine. He shunned and loathed
our conversation as dangerous and wicked, and of a depraved nature: Whereas the other so
little regarded us, that we could neither trouble nor alter him by our contagion; he
forsooke our company, not for fear, but for disdaine of our commerce: He never thought
us capable or sufficient to do either good or evil. Of the same stampe was the answer of
Statilius, to whom Brutus spake to win him to take part, and adhere to the conspiracie
against Cæsar: He allowed the enterprize to be very just, but disalowed of the men that
should performe the same, as unworthy that any man would put himself in any adventure
for them: Conformable to the discipline of Hegesias, who said, That a man ought never to
do anything but for himself; forasmuch as he alone is worthy to have any action
performed for him: and to that of Theodorus,who thought it an injustice that a wise man
would in any case hazard himself for the good and benefit of his countrie, or to endanger
his wisdom for fooles. Our own condition is as ridiculous as risible, as much to be

laught at as able to laugh.



Return to


CHAPTER LI. OF THE VANITIE OF WORDS






CHAPTER LI. OF THE VANITIE OF WORDS
RHETORICIAN of ancient times said that his trade was to make small
things appeare and seem great. It is a shoemaker that can make great
shooes for a little foot. Had he lived in Sparta he had doubtlesse been
well whipped for professing a false, a couzening and deceitful art. And I
think Archidamus King of that City did not with out astonishment
listen unto the answer of Thucydides, of whom he demanded whether he
or Pericles was the strongest and nimblest wrestler; whose answer was
this, Your question Sir, is very hard to be decided; for if in wrestling with him I give him a
fall, with his fair words he perswadeth those that saw him on the ground that he never
fell, and so gets the victory. Those that maske and paint women commit not so foul a
fault; for it is no great loss, though a man see them not, as they were naturally borne and
unpainted: Whereas these profess to deceive and beguile not of eyes, but our judgement,
and to bastardize and corrupt the offence of things. Those common-wealths that have
maintained themselves in a regular formal, and well governed estate, as that of Creete and

Lacedemon, did never make any great esteeme of orators. Ariston did wisely define
Rhetorike to be a Science, to persuade the vulgar people: Socrates and Plato to be an Art
to deceive and flatter. And those which denie it in the general description, do every
where in their precepts verify the same. The Mahometans, by reason of its inutilitie, forbid
the teaching of it to their children. And the Athenians, perceiving how pernicious the
profession and use thereof was, and of what credit in their City, ordained that their
principal part, which is to move affections, should be dismissed and taken away, together
with all exordiums and perorations. It is an instrument devised to busie, to manage, and to
agitate a vulgar and disordered multitude; and is an implement to be employed but about
distempered and sicke mindes, as Physicke about crazed bodies. And those where either
the vulgar, the ignorant, or the generalitie have had all power, as that of Rhodes, those of
Athens, and that of Rome, and where things have ever been in continuall disturbance and
uproar, thither have Orators and the professors of that Art flocked. And verily, if it be well
looked into, you shall find very few men in those common-wealths that without helpe of
eloquence have attained to any worthy estimation and credit: Pompey, Cæsar, Crassus,
Lucullus, Lentulus, Metellus, have thence taken their greatest stay and furtherance,
whereby they have ascended unto that height and greatness of authority whereunto they
at last attained, and against the opinion of better times have more prevailed with words
than with arms. For L. Volumnius, speaking publikely in favor of the election which
some had made of Quintus Fabius and Publius Decius to be Consuls, says thus: They are
men borne unto war, of high spirits, of great performance, and able to effect anything;
but rude, simple, and unarted in the combat of talking: minds truly consulare. They only
are good Pretors, to do justice in the City (says he), that are subtile, cautelous, well-
spoken, wily, and lip-wise. Eloquence has chiefly flourished in Rome when the common-
wealths affairs have been in worst estate and that the devouring Tempest of civill
broyles, and intestine wars did most agitate and turmoil them. Even as a rancke, free and
untamed soyle, beareth the rankest and strongest weeds, whereby it seems that those
common weales which depend of an absolute Monarch, have less need of it than others:
For that foolishnesse and facilitie which is found in the common multitude, and which
does subject the same to be managed, persuaded, and led by the ears by the sweet,
alluring and sense-entrancing sound of this harmonie, without duly weighing, knowing, or
considering the trueth of things by force of reason: This facilitie and easy yielding, I say,
is not so easily found in one only ruler, and it is more easy to warrant him from the
impression of this poyson, by good institution and sound counsell. There was never seen
any notable or far-renowned Orator to come out of Macedon or Persia. What I have
spoken of it, has been upon the subject of an Italian, whom I have lately entertained into
my service, who during the life of the whilom cardinall Caraffa served him in the place of
steward of his house. Enquiring of his charge and particular quality, he told me a long,
formall and eloquent discourse of the science or skill of epicurisme and gluttonie, with
such an Oratorie-gravitie and Magistrale countenance as if he had discoursed of some high
mysterious point of divinitie, wherein he has very methodically-decifred and
distinguished sundrie differences of appetites: First of that which a man has fasting, then
of that men have after the first, the second, and third service. The severall means how

sometimes to please it simply, and other times to sharpen and provoke the same; the
policy and rare invention of his sawces: First, in general terms then particularizing the
qualities and severall operations of the ingredients, and their effects: The difference of
salades according to their distinct seasons; which must be served in warme, and which
cold: The manner how to dress, how to adorn and embellish them, to make them more
pleasing to the sight. After that, he entered into a large and far-fetcht narration touching
the true order and due method of service, full of goodly and important considerations.
--Nec minimo sane discrimine refert,
Quo gestu lepores, et quo gallina secetur. Sat. v. 127.
What grace we use, it makes small diff’rence, when
We carve a Hare, or else breake up a Hen.
And all that filled up and stuffed with rich magnificent words, well couched phrases,
oratorie figures, and patheticall metaphors; indeed such as learned men use and employ in
speaking of the government of an empire, which made me remember my man.
Hoc salsum est, hoc adustum est, hoc lautum est parum,
Illud recte, iterum sic memento, sedulo
Moneo quæ possum pro mea sapientia.
Postremo tanquam in speculum, in patinas, Demea,
Inspicere jubeo, et moneo quid facto usus sit. --Ter. Adel. act. iii. sc. iv.62
This dish is salt, this burnt, this not so fine,
That is well done, do so again; Thus I
As my best wisdom serves, all things assigne.
Lastly, sir, I command, they neatly prie,
On dishes, as a glasse,
And show what needfull was.
Yet did those strict Græcians commend the order and disposition which Paulus Æmilius
observed in the banquet he made them at his return from Macedon: But here I speak not
of the effects, but of the words. I know not whether they work that in others which they
do in me. But when I hear our Architects mouth-out those big and ratling words of
Pilasters, Architraves, Cornixes, Frontispices, Corinthian and Dorike works, and such
like fustian-termes of theirs, I cannot let my wandering imagination from a sodaine
apprehension of Apollidonius his pallace, and I find by, effect that they are the seely and
decayed peeces of my Kitchen-doore. Doe but hear one pronounce Metonymia,
Metaphore, Allegory, Etimologie and other such trash-names of grammar, would you not
think they meant some form of a rare and strange language: They are titles and words
that concerne your chamber-maids tittle-tattle. It is a fopperie and cheating tricke, cousin-

germane unto this, to call the offices of our estate by the proud titles of the ancient
Romans, though they have no resemblance at all of charge, and less of authority and
power. And this likewise, which in mine opinion will one day remaine as a reproch unto
our age, unworthily and undeservedly to bestow on whom we list the most glorious
surnames and loftiest titles, wherewith antiquitie in many long-continued ages honoured
but one or two persons. Plato has by such an universall consent borne- away the surname
of Divine, that no man did ever attempt to envie him for it. And the Italians, which vaunt
(and indeed with some reason) to have generally more lively and far-reaching wits, and
their discourse more solid and sinnowy, than other nations of their times, have lately
therewith embellished Peter Aretine; in whom, except it be an high-raised, proudly-puft,
mind-moving, and heart-danting manner of speech, yet in good sooth more than ordinary
wittie and ingenious; but so new-fangled, so extravagant, so fantastic, so deep-labored;
and to conclude, besides the eloquence, which be it as it may be, I cannot perceive any
thing in it beyond or exceeding that of many other writers of his age, much less that it in
any sort approacheth that ancient divinitie. And the surname Great, we attribute and fasten
the same on princes that have nothing in them exceeding popular greatness.



Return to


CHAPTER LII. OF THE PARCIMONIE OF OUR FOREFATHERS





 Send comments and corrections to the Publisher.
CHAPTER LII. OF THE PARCIMONIE OF OUR FOREFATHERS
TTILIUS REGULUS, General of the Romans Armie in Affrike, in the
middest of his glory and victory against the Carthaginians, wrote unto
the common-wealth, that a hyne or plough-boy, whom he had left alone
to over-see and husband his land (which in all was but seven acres of
ground) was run away from his charge, and had stolne from him all his
implements and tools belonging to his husbandrie, craving leave to be
discharged, and that he might come home to looke to his business, for
fear his wife and children should thereby be endomaged: the Senate took order for him,
and appointed another man to looke to his land and business, and made that good unto
him which the other had stolne from him, and appointed his wife and children to be
maintained at the common-wealths charge. Cato the elder, returning Consul from Spain,
sold his horse of service to save the monie he should have spent for his transport by sea
into Italie: And being chief governor in Sardinia, went all his visitations afoot, having no

other traine but one officer of the commonwelth, who carried his gowne and a vessell to
do sacrifice in, and for the most part carried his male himself. He boasted that he never
woare gowne that cost him more than ten crowns, nor sent more than one shilling sterling
to the market for one whole days provision, and had no country house rough-cast or
painted over. Scipio Aemelianus, after he had triumphed twice, and twice been Consull,
went on a solemn legation, accompanied and attended on only with seven servants. It is
reported that Homer had never any more than one servant, Plato three, and Zeno, chief of
the Stoics sect, none at all. Tiberius Gracchus, being then one of the principal men
amongst the Romanes, and sent in commission about weightie matters of the common-
wealth, was allotted but sixpence halfe-penie a day for his charges.



Return to


CHAPTER LII. OF THE PARCIMONIE OF OUR FOREFATHERS






CHAPTER LIII
OF A SAYING OF CÆSAR
F we shall sometimes ammuse ourselves and consider our estate, and
the time we spend in controling others, and to know the things that are
without us; would we but emploie the same in sounding ourselves
throughly, we should easily perceive how all this our contexture is built
of weake and decaying peaces. Is it not an especiall testimony of
imperfection that we cannot settle our contentment on any one thing,
and that even of our own desire and imagination it is beyond our power to chuse what we
stand in need of? Whereof, the disputation that has ever been amongst Philosophers
beareth sufficient witnes, to find out the chief felicitie or summum bonum of man, and
which yet does and shall eternally last without resolution or agreement.

-- dum abest quod avemus, id exuperare videtur
Cætera; post aliud, cum contigit illud, avemus,
Et sitis, æqua tenet. --Lucr. iii. 25.
While that is absent which we wish, the rest
That seems to pass, when ought else is addrest,
That we desire, with equall thirst opprest,
Whatsoever it be that falleth unto our knowledge and jovissance, we find it does not
satisfie us, and we still follow and gape after future, uncertaine, and unknown things,
because the present and known please us not, and do not satisfie us. Not (as I think)
because they have not sufficiently wherewith to satiate and please us, but the reason is that
we apprehend and seize on them with an unruly, disordered, and diseased taste and hold-
fast.
Nam cum vidit hic ad usum flagitat usus,
Onmia jam ferme mortalibus esse parata,
Divitiis homines et honore et laude potentes
Affluere, atque bona natorum excellere fama,
Nec minus esse donmi cuiquam tamen anxia corda,
Atque animum infestis cogi servire querelis:
Intellexit ibi vitium vas facere ipsum,
Omniaaque illius vitio corrumpier intus
Quæ collata foris et commoda quæque venirent. Lucr. ix.
For when the wiseman saw, that all almost,
That use requires, for men prepared was,
That men enriches, honors, praises boast,
In good report of children others pass,
Yet none at home did bear less pensive heart,
But that the mind was forst to serve complaint
He knew, that fault the vessell did empart,
That all was marr’d within by vessels taint,
Whatever good was wrought by any art.
Our appetite is irresolute and uncertaine; it can neither hold nor enjoy any thing
handsomly and after a good fashion. Man supposing it is the vice and fault of things he
possesseth, feedeth and filleth himself with other things, which he neither knows nor
has understanding of, whereto he applyeth both his desires and hopes, and taketh them as
an honor and reverence to himself; as says Cæsar, Communi fit vitio naturæ, ut invisis,
latitantibus atque incognitis rebus magis confidamus vehementiusque exterreamur: It
happens by the common fault of nature that both we are more confident and more

terrified by things unseen, things hidden and unknown.



Return to


CHAPTER LIV. OF VAINE SUBTILTIES, OR SUBTILL DEVICES






CHAPTER LIV. OF VAINE SUBTILTIES, OR SUBTILL DEVICES
HERE are certain frivolous and vain inventions, or as some call them
subtilties of wit, by means of which some men do often endeavour to
get credit and reputation, as diverse Poets that frame whole volumes
with verses beginning with one letter. We see Egges, Whigs, Hatchets,
Crosses, Globes, Columnes, and figures anciently fashioned by the
Græcians, with the measure and proportion of their verses spreading,
lengthening and shortening them in such sort as they justly represent
represent such and such a figure. Such was the science and profession of him who long
time busied himself to number how many severall waies the letters of the Alphabet might
be ranged, and found out that incredible number mentioned by Plutarke. I allow of his
opinion who, having one brought before him that was taught with such industrie, and so
curiously to cast a graine of millet with his hand, that without ever missing he would
every time make it go through a needles-eye, and being entreated to bestow some thing
upon him (as a reward for so rare a skill), very pleasantly and worthily commanded that

this cunning workman should have two or three peckes of millet delivered him, to the end
his rare art and wittie labor might not remaine without dailie exercise. It is a wonderful
testimony of our judgements imbecility that it should commend and allow of things,
either for their rarenesse or noveltie, or for their difficultie, though neither goodnesse or
profit be joined unto them. We come but now from my house, where we have a while
recreated ourselves with devising who could find out most things that held by both
extreme ends. As for example, Sir is in our tongue a title only given to the most eminent
person of the state, which is the King, and yet is commonly given to some of the vulgar
sort, as unto Merchants and Pedlars, and nothing concerneth those of the middle sort, and
that are betweene both. Women of chiefest calling and quality are called Dames, the
meane sort Damoisels, and those of the basest rank are also entitled Dames. The clothes
of estate, which we see set over tables and chaires, are only allowed in Princes houses, yet
we see them used in tavernes. Democritus was wont to say, That Gods and beasts had
quicker senses and sharper wits than men who are of the middle rank. The Romanes
used to weare one self-same garment on mourning and on festivall days. It is most
certain that both an extreme fear and an exceeding heat of courage do equally trouble
and distemper the belly. The nick-name of Tremblant, wherewith Zanchio the twelfth
King of Navarre was surnamed, teacheth that boldness as well as fear engender a
startling and shaking of the limbs. Those which armed either him or any other of the like
nature, whose skin would quiver, assaid to re-assure him by diminishing the danger
wherein he was like to fall: you have no perfect knowledge of me (said he), for if my flesh
knew how far my courage will ere-long carry it, it would presently fall into a flat swoune.
That chilnesse, or as I may terme it, faintnesse, which we feel after the exercises of Venus,
the same does also proceed from an over vehement appetite and disordered heat.
Excessive heat and extreme cold do both boile and rost. Aristotle says, That leaden
vessels do as well melt and consume away by an excessive cold and rigor of winter as by
a vehement heat. Both desire and satietie fill the sense with sorrow both above and under
voluptuousness. Folly and wisdom meet in one point of feeling and resolution above the
suffering of humane accidents. The wiser sort does gourmondise and command evil, and
others know it not: The latter man would say) short of accidents, the other beyond, who
after they have well weighed and considered their qualities, and duly measured and rightly
judged what they are, overleap them by the power of a vigorous courage. They disdaine
and tread them under foot, as having, a strong and solid mind, against which, if fortunes
[darts] chance to light, they must of necessitie be blunted and abated meeting with so
resisting a body, as they cannot pierce or make any impression therein. The ordinary and
meane condition of men abideth betweene these two extremities, which are those that
perceive and have a feeling of mischiefs but cannot endure them. Both infancie and
decreptitude meet with weaknesse of the braine. Covetise and profusion in a like desire to
acquire and hoard up. It may with likelihood be spoken that there is a kind of Abecedarie
ignorance preceding science: another doctorall following science: an ignorance which
science does beget, even as it spoileth the first. Of simple, less-curious, and least-
instructed spirits are made good Christians; who simply believe through reverence and
obedience, and are kept in awe of the laws. In the meane vigor of spirits, and slender

capacitie is engendered the error of opinions. They follow the apparance of the first sense,
and have some title to interpret it foolishnesse and sottishnesse, that we are confirmed in
ancient waies respecting us that are nothing therein instructed by study. The best, most-
settled, and clearest-seeing spirits make another sort of well-beleevers, who by long and
religious investigation, penetrate a more profound and find out a more abstruse light in
scriptures, and discover the mysterious and divine secrets of our ecclesiastical policy.
And therefore see we some of them that have reached unto this last rank, by the second,
with wonderful fruit and confirmation, as unto the furthest bounds of Christian
intelligence, and enjoy their victory with comfort, thanksgiving, reformation of manners,
and great modesty. In which rank my purpose is not to place these others who to purge
themselves from the suspicion of their forepassed errors, and the better to assure us of
them, become extreme, indiscreet, and unjust in the conduct of our cause, and tax and taint
the same with infinite reproaches of violence. The simple peasants are honest men, so are
philosophers (or as our time nameth them, strong and clear natures), enriched with a
large instruction of profitable sciences. The mongrell sort of husbandmen, who have
disdained the first form of ignorance of letters, and could never reach unto the other (as
they that sit betweene two stooles, of which besides so many others I am one) are
dangerous, peevish, foolish, and importunate, and they which trouble the world most.
Therefore do I (as much as lieth in me) withdraw my self into the first and natural seat,
whence I never assaied to depart. Popular and meerely natural Poesie has certain graces
and ill-bred liveliness, whereby it concurreth and compareth itself unto the principal
beautie of perfect and artificiall Poesie as may plainly be seen in the Villannelles, homely
gigs, and countrie songs of Gasconie, which are brought us from Nations that have no
knowledge at all, either of any learning or so much as of writing. Meane and indifferent
Poesie, and that consisteth betweene both, is scorned and contemned and passed without
honor or esteemed. But forasmuch as since the passage has been opened unto the spirit,
I have found (as it commonly happens) that we had apprehended that which is neither so
nor so for a difficult exercise and of a rare subject; and that since our invention has been
set on fire it discovereth an infinite number of like examples. I will only adde this one:
That if these Essayes were worthy to be judged of, it might in mine opinion happen that
they would not greatly please the common and vulgar spirits, and as little the singular and
excellent. The first will understand but little of them, the latter over much; they might
perhaps live and rub out in the middle region.




Return to


CHAPTER LV. OF SMELS AND ODORS






CHAPTER LV. OF SMELS AND ODORS
T is reported of some, namely of Alexander, that their sweat, through
some rare and extraordinary complexion, yielded a sweet smelling
savour, whereof Plutarke and others seek to find out the cause. But the
common sort of bodies are cleane contrary, and the best quality they
have is to be clear of any smell at all. The sweetness of the purest
breaths has nothing more perfect in them than to be without savour,
that may offend us, as are those of healthy sound children. And therefore says Plautus:
Mulier tum bene olet, ubi nihil olet. Plau. Mostel act. 1. sc. 3.
Then smels a woman purely well,
When she of nothing else does smell.
The most exquisit and sweetest savour of a woman it is to smell of nothing; and sweet,

well-smelling, strange savours may rightly be held suspicious in such as use them; and a
man may lawfully think who useth them does it to cover some natural defect: whence
proceed these ancient Poeticall sayings, To smell sweet, is to stinke,
Rides nos, Coracine, nil olentes,
Malo quam bene olere, nil oleres. --Mart. vi. Epig. lv. 4.
You laugh at us that we of nothing savour,
Rather smell so, than sweeter (by your favor).
And else where:
Posthume, non bene olet, qui bene semper olet. -- ii. Epig. xii. 4.
Good sir, he smells not ever sweet,
Who smells still sweeter than is meet.
Yet love I greatly to be entertained with sweet smells, and hate exceedingly all manner of
sowre and ill savours, which I shall sooner smell than any other.
Namque sagacius unus odoror,
Polypus, an gravis hirsutis cubet hircus in alis,
Quam canis acer ubi lateat sus. -- Hor. Epod. xii. 4.
Sooner smell I, whether a cancred nose,
Or rank gote-smell in hairie arm-pits lie,
Than sharpest hounds, where rowting bores repose.
The simplest and meerely natural smells are most pleasing unto me; which care ought
chiefly to concerne women. In the very heart of Barbarie, the Scithian women, after they
have washed themselves, did sprinkle, dawbe, and powder all their bodies and faces over
with a certain odoriferous drug that groweth in their countrie: which dust and dawbing
being taken away, when they come near men, or their husband, they remaine very
cleane, and with a very sweet savouring perfume. What odour soever it be, it is strange to
see what hold it will take on me, and how apt my skin is to receive it. He that complaineth
against nature, that she has not created man with a fit instrument, to carrie sweet smells
fast-tied to his nose, is much to blame: for they carrie themselves. As for me in particular,
my mustachoes, which are very thick, serve me for that purpose. Let me but approach my
gloves or my hand-kercher to them, their smell will sticke upon them a whole day. They
manifest the place I come from. The close-smacking, sweetness-moving, love-alluring,
and greedie-smirking kisses of youth, were heretofore wont to sticke on them many
hours after; yet am I little subject to those popular diseases that are taken by conversation

and bred by the contagion of the air: And I have escaped those of my time of which
there has been many and severall kinds, both in the Townes about me, and in our Armie:
We read of Socrates that during the time of many plagues and relapses of the pestilence,
which so often infested the City of Athens, he never forsooke or went out of the Town:
yet was he the only man that was never infected, or that felt any sicknesse. Physitians
might (in mine opinion) draw more use and good from odours than they do. For myself
have often perceived that according unto their strength and quality they change and alter,
and move my spirits, and work strange effects in me: which makes me approve the
common saying, that the invention of incense and perfumes in Churches, so ancient and so
far-dispersed throughout all nations and religions, had an especiall regard to rejoice, to
comfort, to quicken, to rowze, and to purifie our senses, that so we might be the apter and
readier unto contemplation. And the better to judge of it, I would I had my part of the skill
which some Cookes have, who can so curiously season and temper strange odors with the
savor and relish of their meats. As it was especially observed in the service of the King of
Tunes, who in our days landed at Naples, to meet and enter-parly with the Enperour
Charles the fifth. His viandes were so exquisitely farced, and so sumptuously seasoned
with sweet odoriperous drugs and aromaticall spices, that it was found upon his book of
accompt the dressing of one peacocke and two fesants amounted to one hundred duckets;
which was their ordinary manner of cooking his meats. And when they were carved up,
not only the dining chambers, but all the roomes of his palace and the streets round about
it, were replenished with an exceeding odoriferous and aromaticall vapour, which
continued a long time after. The principal care I take, wherever I am lodged, is to
avoid and be far from all manner of filthy, foggy, ill-savouring and unwholesome aires.
The goodly Cities of strangely-seated Venice, and huge-built Paris, by reason of the
muddy, sharp, and offending savors which they yield; the one. by her fennie and marish
situation, the other by her durtie uncleannesse and continuall mire, do greatly alter and
diminish the favor which I bear them.



Return to








CHAPTER LVI
OF PRAIERS AND ORISONS
PROPOSE certain formelesse and irresolute fantasies, as do those
schollers who in schooles publish doubtfull and sophisticall questions
to be disputed and canvased: not to establish the truth, but to find it out,
which I submit to their judgements, to whom the ordering and directing
not only of my actions and compositions, but, also of my thoughts,
belongeth. The condemnation, as well as the approbation of them, will
be equally acceptable and profitable unto me, deeming it absurd and impious if anything
be either ignorantly or unadvisedly set down in this rapsody, contrary unto the sacred
resolutions and repugnant to the holy prescriptions of the Catholike, Apostolike, and
Roman Church, wherein I was borne, and out of which I purpose not to die. And
therefore alwaies referring myself unto their censures that have all power over me, do I
meddle so rashly to write of all manner of purposes and discourses as I do here. I wot not
whether I be deceived, but, sithence by an especiall and singular favor of Gods divine
bounty, a certain form of prayer has by the very mouth of God, word by word, been

prescribed and directed unto us, I have ever thought the use of it should be more ordinary
with us than it is. And might I be believed, both rising and going to bed, sitting down and
rising from boord, and going about any particular action or business, I would have all
good Christians to say the Paternoster, and if no other praier, at least not to omit that. The
Church may extend, amplifie, and diversifie praiers according to the need of our
instruction: For I know it is alwaies the same substance, and the same thing. But that one
should ever have this privilege, that all manner of people should at all times and upon
every occasion have it in their mouth: For it is most certain that only it containeth
whatsoever we want, and is most fit and effectuall in all events. It is the only praier I use
in every place, at all times, and upon every accident; and instead of changing, I use often
repetition of it: whence it commeth to pass that I remember none so well as that one. I
was even now considering whence this general error commeth, that in all our desseignes
and enterprises, of what nature soever, we immediately have recourse unto God, and in
every necessitie we call upon his holy name: And at what time soever we stand in need of
any help and that our weaknesse wanteth assistance, we only invoke him, without
considering whether the occasion be just or unjust; and what estate or action we be in, or
go about, be it never so vicious or unlawfull we call upon his name and power. Indeed,
he is our only protector, and of power to affoord us all manner of helpe and comfort; but
although he vouchsafe to honor us with this joy-bringing fatherly adoption, yet is he as
just as he is good, and as good and just as he is mightie: But oftner useth his justice than
his might, and favoureth us according to the reason of the same, and not according to our
requests. Plato in his laws maketh three sorts of injurious beliefs in the Gods: First, that
there is none at all; Secondly that they meddle not with our affairs; Thirdly, that they
never refuse any thing unto our vows, offerings, and sacrifices. The first error,
according to his opinion, did never continue immutable in man, even from his first
infancie unto this latter age. The two succeeding may admit some constancy. His justice
and power are inseparable. It is but in vain to implore his power in a bad cause. Man
must have an unpolluted soul when he praieth (at least in that moment he addresseth
himself to pray) and absolutely free from all vicious passions; otherwise we ourselves
present him the rods to scourge us withall. In liew of redressing our fault, we redouble the
same by presenting him with an affection fraught with irreverence, sinne, and hatred, to
whom only we should sue for grace and forgivenesse. See here, why I do not willingly
commend those Pharisaicall humors, whom I so often behold, and more than ordinary,
to pray unto God, except their actions immediately preceding or succeeding their praiers
witness some show of reformation or hope of amendment.
-- Si nocturnus adulter
Tempora sanctonico velas adoperta cucullo. Juven. Sat. viii. 144.
If in a cape-cloake-hood befrenchifide
Thou a night-whore-munger your head do hide
And the state of a man that commixeth devotion unto an execrable life, seems in some
sort to be more condemnable than that of one that is conformable unto himself, and every

way dissolute. Therefore does our Church continually refuse the favor of her enterance
and societie unto customs and manners wilfully obstinate on some egregious villanie. We
only pray by custom and use, and for fashion sake, or, to say better we but read and
pronounce our prayers: To conclude, it is nothing but a show of formalitie, and a formall
show. And it greeveth me to see many men, who at grace before and after meat will with
great show of devotion crosse themselves three or foure times (and it vexeth me so much
the more, when I call to mind that it is a signe I greatly reverence, and have in continual
use, indeed, if I be but gaping) and there whilst, shall you see them bestow all other hours of
the day in all manner of hatred, malice, covetousnesse, and injustice. Many hours spend
they about vice, but one to God, and that as it were by way of recompense and
composition. It is wonderous to see so far different and diverse actions, continue with so
even a tenor, that no interruptions or alteration at all can be perceived, either about their
confines, or passage from one unto another. What prodigious conscience can be at any
harts-ease, fostring, and feeding with so mutual, quiet, and agreeing society in one self
same mansion, both crime and judge? A man whose Paillardize and luxurie does
uncessantly sway and rule the head, and who judgeth the same abhominable and most
hateful in the sight of God; what says he unto his all-seeing Majesty, when he openeth
his lips, either of mouth or hart, to speak to him of it? He reclaimeth himself, but falleth
sodainly again. If the object of his divine justice, and his presence should strike, (as he
says) and chastise his soul, how short-soever the penitence were, fear itself would so
often cast his thought on it, that he would presently perceive himself master of those
vices which are habituated, inbred, setled, and enfleshed in him. But what of those which
ground a whole life upon the fruit and benefit of that sinne they know to be mortal? How
many trades, professions, occupations, and vocations have we daily and continually used,
frequented, and allowed amongst us, whose essence is vicious and most pernicious? And
he that would needs confesse himself unto me, and of his own accord told me, that for
fear of losing his credit and to keep the honor of his offices; he had for a whole age
made show and profession, and acted the effects of a religion, which in his own self-
accusing conscience he judged damnable, and cleane contrary unto that he had in his hart:
How could he admit and foster so contradictorie and impious a discourse in his hart? With
what language entertaine they divine justice concerning this subject? Their repentance,
consisting in visible amends and manageable reparation; they lose both towards God and
us, the means to alleage the same. Are they so malapart and foolhardy as to crave
pardon without satisfaction, and sans repentance? I think it goeth with the first as with
the last: But obstinacy is not herein so easy to be vanquished. This so suddaine
contrarietie, and violent volubilitie of opinion, which they faine unto us, seems to me a
miracle. They present us with the state of an indigestible agonie. How fantastic seemed
their imagination unto me, who these latter years had taken up a fashion, to checke and
reprove all men that professed the Catholike Religion, in whom shined any extraordinarie
brightnesse of spirit, saying, that it was but feigned: and to do him honor, held that
whatsoever he said in apparance he could not inwardly chuse but have his beliefe
reformed according to their byase. It is a peevish infirmitie for a man to think himself so
firmely grounded as to persuade himself that the contrary may not be believed: And

more peevish also, to be persuaded by such a spirit, that preferreth I wot not what
disparitie of fortune, before the hopes and threats of eternall life. They may believe me: If
any thing could have attempted my youth, the ambition of the hazard and difficultie which
followed this late-modern enterprize, should have had good part therein. It is not without
great reason, in my poor judgement, that the Church forbiddeth the confused, rash and
indiscreet use of the sacred and divine songs which the holy spirit has indicted unto David.
God ought not to be commixed in our actions, but with awful reverence, and an attention
full of honor and respect. The word or voice is too divine, having no other use but to
exercise our lungs and to please our ears. It is from the conscience and not from the
tongue that it must proceed. It is not consonant unto reason that a prentise or shop-keeping
boy, amiddest his idle, vain, and frivolous conceits, should be suffered to entertaine
himself, and play therewith. Nor is it seemely or tolerable to see the sacred book of our
beliefes Mysteries tossed up and down and plaid withall, in a shop, or a hall, or a kitchen.
They have heretofore been accompted mysteries, but through the abuse of times they are
now held as sports and recreations. So serious and venerable a study should not, by way of
pastime and tumultuarie, be handled. It ought to be a fixed, a purposed, and setted action,
to which this preface of our office sursum corda should ever be adjoind; and the very
exterior parts of the body should with such a countenance be referred unto it, that to all
mens eyes it may witness a particular attention and duteous respect. It is not a study
fitting all men, but only such as have vowed themselves unto it, and whom God has, of
his infinit mercy, called thereto. The wicked, the ungodly, and the ignorant, are thereby
empaired. It is no historie to be fabulously reported, but a historie to be dutifully
reverenced, awfully feared, and religiously adored. Are they not pleasantly conceited,
who, because they have reduced the same into the vulgar tongues, and that all men may
understand it, persuade themselves, that the people shall the better conceive and digest the
same? Consisteth it but in the words, that they understand not all they find written? Shall I
say more? By approaching thus little unto it, they go back from it. Meere ignorance, and
wholly relying on others, was verily more profitable and wiser than is this verball and
vain knowledge, the nurse of presumption and source of temeritie. Moreover, I am of
opinion that the uncontrouled liberty, that all men have to wrest, dissipate, and wyredraw
a word so religious and important, to so many severall idiomes, has much more danger
than profit following it. The Jewes, the Mahometans, and well- nigh all other nations, are
wedded unto and reverence the language wherein their mysteries and religion had
originally been conceived; and any change or translation has not without apparance of
reason been directly forbidden. Know we whether there be Judges enow in Basque and in
Brittanie to establish this translation made in their tongue? The universall Church has no
more difficult and solemn judgement to make. Both in speaking and preaching the
interpretation is wandring, free, and mutable, and of one parcell; so it is not likewise. One of
the Greek Historians does justly accuse his age, forasmuch as the secrets of Christian
religion were dispersed in all public places, and even amongst the basest artificers; and
that every man might, at his pleasure, dispute of it, and at random speak his mind of the
same. And it should be a great shame for us, who by the unspeakable grace of God injoy
the pure and sacred mysteries of piety, to suffer the same to be profaned in the mouthes of

ignorant and popular people, seeing the very Gentiles interdicted Socrates and Plato, and
the wisest, to meddle, enquire or speak of things communicated unto the Priestes of
Delphos. Saying, moreover, That the factions of Princes, touching the subject of
Divinities, are armed, not with zeale, but with anger, that zeale dependeth of divine
reason and justice, holding an orderly and moderate course, but that it changeth into
hatred and envie, and in stead of corne and grape, it produces nettles and darnell, if it be
directed by humane passion. And justly says this other, who counselling the Emperor
Theodosius, affirmed that disputations did not so much appease and lull asleepe the
schismes of the Church, as stir up and cause heresies. And therefore it hehooved to avoid
all contentions, controversies, and logicall arguing, and wholly and sincerely refer
himself unto the prescriptions and orders of faith, established by our forefathers. And
Andronicus the Emperor, finding by chance in his pallace certain principal men very
earnestly disputing against Lapodius about one of our points of great importance, taunted
and rated them very bitterly, and threatened if they gave not over, he would cause them to
be cast into the river. Children and women do now adaies governe and sway the oldest
and most experienced men concerning Ecclesasticall Lawes: whereas the first that Plato
made forbiddeth them to enquire after the reason of civill Lawes, and which ought to
stand in place of divine ordinances. Allowing aged men to communicate the same
amongst themselves, and with the magistrate, adding moreover, alwaies provided it be not
in the presence of young men and before profane persons. A notable Bishop has left
written, that in the other end of the world there is an island called of our predecessours
Dioscorida, very commodious and fertile of all sorts of fruits and trees, and of a pure and
wholesome air; whose people are Christians, and have Churches and Altars, adorned
with nothing else but crosses, without other images; great observers of fasting and holy
days; exact payers of their priests tithes, and so chaste that none of them may lawfully all
his life long know any more than one wife. And in all other matters so well pleased with
their fortune, that being seated in the middest of the sea, they have and know no use of
ships: and so simple, that of their religion, which they so diligently and awfully observe,
they know not, nor understand so much as one only word. A thing incredible to him that
knew not how the Pagans, who are so devout and zealous idolaters, know nothing of their
Gods but only their bare names and statues. The ancient beginning of Menalippe, a
tragedie of Euripides, importeth thus:
Jupiter, car de toy rien sinon,
Ie ne cognois seulement que le nom. --Eurip.
O Jupiter, for unto me
Only the name is known of you.
I have also in my head certain writings complained of, for so much as they are meerely
humane and philosophicall, without medling with the diviity. He that should say to the
contrary, which a man might do with reason, that heavenly doctrine, as a Queene and
governesse does better keep her rank apart; that she ought to be chief ruler and

principal head everie where, and not suffragant and subsidiarie: And that perhaps
examples in grammar, rethorike, and logike, might more fitly and sortably be taken from
elsewhere, than from so sacred and holy a subject, as also the arguments of theatres, plots
of plaies, and grounds of public spectacles: That mysteriously divine reasons are more
venerably and reverently considered alone, and in their native stile, than joined and
compared to human discourse. That this fault is oftener seen, which is, that Divines write
too humanely, than this other, that humanists write not Theologically enough. Philosophy,
says S. Chrysostome, is long since banished from sacred schools as an unprofitable
servant, and deemed unworthy to bebold, but in passing by the entrie or the vestrie of the
sacred treasures of heavenly doctrine. That the formes of humane speech are more base,
and ought by no means to make any use of the dignitie, majestie and preheminence of
divine speech. As for my part I give it leave to say, Verbis indisciplinatis, With
undisciplined words Fortune, destinie, chance, accident, fate, good lucke, ill lucke, the
Gods, and other phrases, as best it pleaseth. I repose humane fantasies and my own,
simply as humane conceits, and severally considered; not as setled, concluded, and
directed by celestiall ordinance, incapable of any doubt or alteration. A matter of opinion,
and not of faith. What I discourse according to my self, not what I believe according unto
God, with a laicall fashion, and not a clericall manner; yet ever most religious; As children
propose their essays, instructable, not instructing. And might not a man also say without
apparance, that the institution which wills no man shall dare to write of religion but
sparingly and reservedly, except such as make express profession of it, would not want
some show of profit and justice; and happily to me to be silent. It has been told me, that
even those which are not of our consent do flatly inhibite amongst themselves the use of
the sacred name of God in all their vulgar and familiar discourses. They would have no
man use it as an interjection or exclamation, not to be alleged as a witness or
comparison, wherein I find they have reason. And however it be that we call God to our
commerce and societie, it should be zealously, seriously, and religiously. There is, as far
as I remember, such a like discourse in Xenophon, wherein be declareth: That we should
more rarely pray unto God: forasmuch as it is not easy we should so often settle our
minds in so regular, so reformed, and so devout a seat, where indeed it ought to be, to pray
aright and effectually: otherwise our praiers are not only vain and unprofitable, but
vicious. Forgive us (say we) our offences, as we forgive them that trespasse against us.
What else inferre we by that petition, but that we offer him our soul void of all revenge
and free from all rancour? We nevertheless invoke God and call on his aid, even in the
complot of our grievousest faults, and desire his assistance in all manner of injustice and
iniquitie.
Quæ nisi seductis nequeas committere -- Divis. Pers. Sat. ii. 4.
Which you to Saints not drawne aside,
Would think unfit to be applide.
The covetous man sueth and praieth unto him for the vain increase and superfluous

preservation of his wrong-gotten treasure. The ambitious he importuneth God for the
conduct of his fortune, and that he may have the victory of all his desseignes. The theefe,
the pirate, the murtherer, indeed the traitor, all call upon him, all implore his aid, and all
solicite him, to give them courage in their attempts, constancy in their resolutions to
remove all lets and difficulties, that in any sort may withstand their wicked executions and
impious actions, or give him thanks if they have had good success; the one if he have met
with a good bootie, the other if he return home rich, the third if no man has seen him kill
his enemy, and the last though he have caused an execrable mischief. The souldier, if he
but go to besiege a cottage, to scale a castle, to rob a church, to pettard a gate, to force a
religious house, or any villanous act, before he attempt it praieth to God for his assistance,
though his intents and hopes be full-fraught with crueltie, murther, covetise, luxurie,
sacrilege, and all iniquitie.
Hoc ipsum quo in Iovis aurem impellere tentas,
Dic agedum, Staio: proh Jupiter, O bone, clamet,
Jupiter! at sese non clamet Jupiter ipse. --21.
Go-to then, say the same to some bad fellow,
Which you prepar’st for Gods ears: let him bellow,
God, good God; so God,
On himself would not plod.
Margaret, Queene of Navarre, maketh mention of a young prince (whom, although she
name not expressly, yet his greatness has made him sufficiently known) who going
about an amorous assignation, and to be with an advocates wife of Paris, his way lying
alongst a church, he did never pass by so holy a place, whether it were in going or
coming from his lecherie and cukolding-labor, but would make his praiers unto God, to
be his help and furtherance. I would faine have an impartiall man tell me to what purpose
this prince invoked and called on God for his divine favor, having his mind only bent to
sinne, and his thoughts set on luxurie: Yet does she alleage him for a speciall testimony of
singular devotion. But it is not only by this example a man might verifie that women are
not very fit to manage or treat matters of religion and divinitie. A true and hartie praier,
and an unfained religious reconciliation from us unto God, cannot likely fall into a wicked
and impure soul, especially when Sathane swaieth the same. He that calleth upon God for
his assistance, whilst he is engulphed and wallowing in filthy sinne, does as the cut-purse
that should call for justice unto his ayd, or those that produce God in witness of a lie.
-- tacito mala vota susurro
Concipimus. --Lucan. v. 94
With silent whispering we,
For ill things suppliants be.

There are few men that would dare to publish the secret requests they make to God.
Haud cuivis promptum est, murmur que humilesque susurros
Tollere de Templis et aperto vivere voto.
From Church low-whispering murmurs to expell,
’Tis not for all, or with known vows live well.
And that’s the reason why the Pythagorians would have them public that all night hear
them, that no man should abusively call on God, and require any undecent or unjust thing
of him as that man:
-- Clare cum dixit, Apollo,
Labra movet metuens audiri: pulchra Laverna
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri.
Noctem peccatis, et fraudibus objice nubem. Hor. i. Epist. xvi. 59.
When he alowd has said, Apollo hear,
Loth to be heard, Goddesse of theeves, said he,
Grant me to cousen, and yet just appeare,
My faults in night, my frauds in clouds let be.
The Gods did grievously punish the unpious vows of Oedipus by granting them unto
him. His praier was, that his children might betweene themselves decide in arms the
succession of his estate; he was so miserable as to be taken at his word. A man should not
request that all things follow our will, but that it may follow wisdom. Verily, it seems
that we make no other use of our praiers, than of a companie of gibrish phrases: and as
those who employ holy and sacred words about witchcraft and magicall effects; and that
we imagine their effect dependeth of the contexture, or sound, or succession of words, or
from our countenance. For, our soul, being full-fraught with concupiscence and all
manner of ungodly thoughts, nothing touched with repentence, nor moved with new
reconciliation towards God, we headlong present unto him those heedlesse words which
memory affoordeth our tongue, by which we hope to obtaine an expiation and remission
of our offences. There is nothing so easy, so sweet, so comfortable and favourable, as the
law of God; she (of his infinit mercy) calleth us unto him, how faultie and detestable
soever we be; she gently stretcheth forth her arms unto us and mildly receiveth us into
her lap, how guiltie, polluted, and sinfull soever we are, and may be in aftertimes. But in
recompence of so houndlesse and unspeakable a favor, she must be thankfully accepted,
and cheerfully regarded: and so gracious a pardon must be received with a gratitude of the
soul, and at least, in that instant, that we addresse ourselves unto her presence, to have
our soul grieved for her faults, penitent of her sinnes, hating those passions and
affections that have caused or provoked us to transgresse his laws, to offend his Majestie,

and to breake his commandments. Plato says that neither the Gods nor holiest men will
ever accept the offering of a wicked man.
Immunis aram si tetigit manus,
Non sumptuosa blandior hostia
Mollivit aversos Penates,
Farre pio et saliente mica. --iii. Od. xxiii. 17.
If guiltlesse hand the Altar tuch,
No offring, cost it neer so much,
Shall better please our God offended,
Than corne with crackling-corne-salt blended.



Return to


CHAPTER LVII. OF AGE






CHAPTER LVII. OF AGE
CANNOT receive that manner, whereby we establish the continuance
of our life. I see that some of the wiser sort do greatly shorten the
same in respect of the common opinion. What said Cato Iunior, to those
who sought to hinder him from killing himself? ’Doe I now live the
age, wherein I may justly be reproved to leave my life too soone?’ Yet
was he but eight and fortie years old. He thought that age very ripe,
indeed, and well advanced, considering how few men come unto it. And such as entertaine
themselves with I wot not what kind of course, which they call natural, promiseth some
few years beyond, might do it, had they a privilege that could exempt them from so great
a number of accidents, unto which each one of us stands subject by a natural subjection
and which may interrupt the said course they propose unto themselves. What fondnesse is
it for a man to think he shall die, for and through a failing and defect of strength, which
extreme age draweth with it, and to propose that terme unto our life, seeing it is the rarest
kind of all deaths and least in use? We only call it natural, as if it were against nature to

see a man breake his necke with a fall; to be drowned by shipwracke; to be surprised with
a pestilence or pleurisie, and as if our ordinary condition did not present these
inconveniences unto us all. Let us not flatter ourselves with these fool-goodly words: a
man may perhaps rather call that natural which is general, common, and universall.
To die of age is a rare, singular, and extraordinarie death, and so much less natural than
others: It is the last and extremest kind of dying: The further it is from us, so much the
less is it to be hoped for: Indeed it is the limit beyond which we shall not pass, and
which the law of nature has prescribed unto us as that which should not be outgone by
any: but it is a rare privilege peculiar unto herself, to make us continue unto it. It is an
exemption, which through some particular favor she bestoweth on some one man, in the
space of two or three ages, discharging him from the crosses, troubles, and difficulties she
has enterposed betweene both in this long cariere and pilgrimage. Therefore my opinion
is, to consider that the age unto which we are come is an age whereto few arive: since men
come not unto it by any ordinary course, it is a signe we are very forward. And since we
have past the accustomed bounds, which is the true measure of our life, we must not hope
that we shall go much further. Having escaped so many occasions of death, wherein we
see the world to fall, we must acknowledge that such an extraordinarie fortune as that is,
which maintaineth us, and is beyond the common use, is not likely to continue long. It is a
fault of the very laws to have this false imagination: They allow not a man to be capable
and of discretion to manage and dispose of his own goods, until he be five and twentie
years old, yet shall he hardly preserve the state of his life so long. Augustus abridged five
years of the ancient Roman laws, and declared that for any man that should take upon
him the charge of judgement, it sufficed to be thirty years old. Servius Tullius dispensed
with the Knights who were seven and fortie years of age from all voluntarie services of
war. Augustus brought them to fortie and five. To send men to their place of sojourning
before they be five and fiftie or three score years of age, me seems carrieth no great
apparance with it. My advice would be, that our vacation and employment should be
extended as I far as might be for the public commoditie; but I blame some, and
condemne most, that we begin not soone enough to employ ourselves. The same
Augustus had been universall and supreme judge of the world when he was but nineteene
years old, and would have another to be thirty before he shall be made a competent
Judge of a cottage or farme. As for my part, I think our minds are as full grown and
perfectly joynted at twentie years as they should be, and promise as much as they can. A
mind which at that age has not given some evident token or earnest of her sufficiencie,
shall hardly give it afterward, put her to what trial you list. Natural qualities and vertues,
if they have any vigorous or beauteous thing in them, will produce and show the same
within that time, or ever. They say in Dauphine,
Si l’espine nou picque quand nai,
A peine que picque jamai. --French prov.
A thorne, unless at first it pricke,
Will hardly ever pearce to the quick.

Of all humane honorable and glorious actions that ever came unto my knowledge, of
what nature soever they be, I am persuaded I should have a harder taske to number those
which, both in ancient times and in ours, have been produced and atchieved before the
age of thirty years, than such as were performed after: indeed, often in the life of the same
men. May not I boldly speak it of those of Hanniball and Scipio his great adversarie?
They lived the better part of their life with the glory which they had gotten in their youth:
And though afterward they were great men in respect of all others, yet were they but
meane in regard of themselves. As for my particular, I am verily persuaded, that since
that age both my spirit and my body have more decreased than encreased, more recoyled
than advanced. It may be, that knowledge and experience shall encrease in them, together
with life, that bestow their time well: but vivacitie, promptitude, constancy, and other
parts much more our own, more important and more essentiall, they droope, they
languish, and they faint.
--ubi jam validis quassatum est virihus ævi
Corpus, et obtusia ceciderunt viribus artus,
Claudicat ingenium, delirat lingtiaque meusque.-- Lucr. iii. 457.
When once the body by shrewd strength of years
Is shak’t, and limbs drawne down from strength that weares,
Wit halts, both tongue and mind
Doe daily doat, we find.
It is the body which sometimes yieldeth first unto age, and other times the mind; and I
have seen many that have had their braines weakened before their stomacke or legs.
And forasmuch as it is a disease, little or nothing sensible unto him that endureth it, and
maketh no great show, it is so much the more dangerous. Here I exclaime against our
Lawes, not because they leave us so long and late in working and employment, but that
they set us a work no sooner, and it is so late before we be employed. Me thinkes that
considering the weaknesse of our life, and seeing the infinit number of ordinary rockes
and natural dangers it is subject unto, we should not so soone as we come into the world,
alot so great a share thereof unto unprofitable wantonnesse in youth, il-breeding idlenesse,
and slow-learning prentissage.
END OF THE FIRST BOOKE




Return to

: Book II
Florio’s Epistle.
Note on the e-text: this  text was provided by Professor Emeritus Ben R. Schneider,
Lawrence University, Wisconsin. It is in the public domain. "Florio’s Translation of 
was first published in 1603. In ’The World’s Classics’ the first volume was published in 1904, and
reprinted in 1910 and 1924." Additional material was supplied by R.S. Bear from the Everyman’s
Library edition of 1910. Content unique to this presentation is copyright © 1999 The University of
Oregon.
THE SECOND BOOKE
xx Florio’s Preface
I.
II.
Of the inconstancie of our Actions
Of Drunkennesse
III. A Custome of the Ile of Cea
IV. To-morrow is a New Day
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
Of Conscience
Of Exercise or Practice
Of the Recompenses or Rewards of Honour
Of the Affections of Fathers to their Children: To the Lady of
Estissac
Of the Parthians Armes
X. Of Bookes
XI. Of Crueltie

XII.
An Apologie of Raymond Sebond
XIII. Of Judging of others’ Death
XIV. How that our Spirit hindereth itself
XV.
XVI.
That our Desires are encreased by Difficultie
Of Glory
XVII. Of Presumption
XVIII. Of giving the Lie
XIX.
XX.
XXI.
XXII.
Of the Liberty of Conscience
We taste nothing purely
Against Idlenesse, or doing Nothing
Of Running Posts, or Couriers
XXIII. Of Bad Meanes emploied to a Good End
XXIV. Of the Roman Greatnesse
XXV.
XXVI.
XXVII.
XXVIII.
XXIX.
How a Man should not Counterfeit to be Sicke
Of Thumbs
Cowardize the Mother of Cruelty
All Things have their Season
Of Vertue
XXX. Of a Monstrous Child
XXXI. Of Anger and Choler
XXXII.
A Defence of Seneca and Plutarke
XXXIII. The Historie of Spurina
XXXIV. Observations concerning the means to war after the manner of
Julius Cæsar
XXXV.
XXXVI.
XXXVII.
Of Three Good Women
Of the Worthiest and Most Excellent Men
Of the Resemblance betweene Children and Fathers
The Epistle

To the Right Ho-
norable and all-praise-worthie Ladies,
Elizabeth Countesse of Rutland,
And Lady Penelope Riche.
Give me leave (peerless, and in all good gifts unparagonized Ladies) though I make my
fault double to aske leave for a fault, which I might leave; yet thus to pair you without
dislike, who like (I imagine) each other above all other, and to whom a like pair long
may I seek, but be long ere I find. Such pairing is no empairing, no disparaging, nor yet
comparing, unless in that good comparison of excellence. This is the number appropritae,
at least reciprocall, of true love: as the two Tables comprised in two commandements of
due love. And such is Gods proceeding, when Mercie and Truth meete together,
Righteousnesse and Peace have kissed each other. Even as body and soul, braine and
heart, memory and understanding; so are yoru two honorablest Lordes made, as you
should be, even: two Doves, two Loves: double kind, double kindness. Both like the two
Cherubins on the toppes and sides of the propiriatorie, respective mutually; like the two
starres of the North, which our Mariners call the Guardes, directive of our course; like
your own eyes, their own only matches; yet as much pleasing others with their sight, as
your themselves (Paul. Gio. Imp.).And hereby, as your Cognisance (noblest Countesse of
R UTLAND ) bears the body or chief part of an Imprese made for a worthy Dutchesse of
Florence: Cum pudore læta fæcunditas: to reape as much joy by Iuno, as labor by
Lucina, and honor by them both:which being so well graffed shall be (as the Italian spake
in Dutch) Wan Got will (Ibid.): wherof yet a fair patterne you have here (be it
auspicious) associated to you: I meane you (truely-richest Lady R ICH ) in riches of
Fortune not deficient, but of body incomparably richer, of mind most rich: who yet, like
Cornelia, were you out-vied,or by riche shewes envited to show your richest jewelles,
would stay till your sweet Images (your dear-sweet children) came from schoole. And if
you may so joy in those your yong Schollers, of such hope, of such spirit, so nobly borne,
so worthily proceeding: how then may I boast of both your Ladiships, of such proofe, of
such merite, my not only proficient, but perfect Schollers? Yea, as of love, so of
language, peerless Ladies? who likethat great and good Cornelia, not only with bountie
entertaine, but of benignitie invite learned and vertuous stangers, not so much to employ,
as rather to releeve, indeed oblige, indeed ammuse, indeed drive them to admiration or veneration
of your singular sufficiencies, surmounting magananimitie, and inestimable value, even
from forraine Princes that come to see this happy-happiest Iland to receive gratulations,
and merit commendations. Who also, like another of the same name, to your great and
good Pompeys brought an invaluable dowrie, not only of Nobilitie, Learning, Language,
Musicke, but withall, an incurious gravitie, and all-accomplish’t virtue. So as into this
familie of these Corneliaes, as many ciences into one stocke, the Orator may well
conclude the wisdom and virtue of many engraffed and collected. And though this
Montaigne-Lord, not so knightly as uncivilly, in this your part acknowledgeth no dozens of

good women at any time in one place (Mont. l. ii. c. 35) (in France it may be, or of his
knowledge) but only a bare trinity, and those Italians, and that about their husbandes
death to die with or afore them; forgetting he had instanced but a little before, out of
Propertius and others (Ibid. lib. ii. c. 29), in many Indians; who, did they ordinarily as
much for their husbands, would out of doubt affectionately do more for them yet living:
yet as even those Corneliaes, and in that very poynt, both in Plutarke (Plut. vit. Grac. &
Pomp.), both (as God would have it) surviving their husbands, the one prevented by her
husbands wise kindenesse, the other with all sympathy attending his extreme fortune;
both while they lived, preserved the Dead in Honorable memory: as also in his kind
three other in Plutarke went as far; namely Empona, Camma and Damocrita: or this
mans Theoxena, Sextila, Praxea, Pelagia, Sophronia, Fulvia, and many more (Mont. lib. ii.
c. 27 & c. 3); since in the Roman proscriptions, as one of their Historians does testifie,
many wives were found exceeding faithful, but few men-servants, fewer friends, and fewest
sons. So neyther is one virtue fit for all, not all fit for one virtue: nor is that one so
excellent, but by more it might be mended: not deem I his three so good, but many have
bin, and some be much better: Yea, as a Christian, I must deny them good, who cast backe
Gods good gift before he call for it; leave their fair corps-de-guarde ere their General
discharge them; hope to be deified for being their own murtherers, who should be
damned if they were so to others; more savage to their own soules, than any beast would
be to their own flesh; not of force, but for fear, or for fame at the best: though even in
that (as Plinie thinkes of two of the same persons) the same fact diversly extolled or
abased, as the person that does it, is diverse, high or base. Nor would a wiser Pætus than
his, indeed a better man than his Seneca permitte as good an Arria as his herdaughter to die
as she did; though as willingly she would, but charged her to live after for him and his.
Better yet (but not much) like I that seely one, which this Author approveth by his wise
Duke of Bretaigne in choice of Isabell of Scotland (Ibid. lib. i. c. 24). But since himself
likes it better to be well used in life then at death, and better usage proceeds from better
vertues (for better vertues make you love as well as be beloved: and loyall love from you
makes up his mouth, with sweeter sawce than death) without that extreme trial, I can tell
him we have, and by good hap, my dedications name unto him, halfe a dozen, better,
because more vertuous, and therefore more loved, and as loving. Or, will he admitte but
three, if not paires, yet their Peeres, I must say of three as Ariosto said of one, Credi ogn’
una d’esser quella Fenice (Orl. fu. can. 27): Or as my fellow Nolano in his heroycall furies
wrote (noble Countesse) to your most heroicke father, and in a Sonnet to you Ladies of
England, You are not women, but in their likenesse Nymphs, Goddeses, and of Celestiall
substance (Gior. Bru. hero. fur. arg.)
Et siete in terra quel’ ch’ in ciel’ le stelle,
And above all, that only divine Diana,
Qual’ e tra voi quel che tra gl’ astri il sole.

And cleane contraie to this Censor, the Nobler and the Richer you are, the more
vertuous and worthie we esteeme you by reason and experience. But while I follow my
guide, I have forsaken my self, and while I would winne him friends he workes (I fear)
foes both to him and me of my best friends; while he findes but three good, and that, when
they did so, as I pray God keep mine both from cause and effect, intention and execution:
wherein I follow, if not his Paris preacher, at least his douceur Francoise (Mon. lib. ii. c.
3). But is he then so capriccious, opiniative, so paradoxical? I grount, sometimes
extravagant, often od-chocheted, and ever self-conceited to write of himself out of
himself. Why wrote he then? for him and his. But why do I translate him? For your
Ladiships and yours. What? to displease? Nay, neither does such extraordinarinesse ever
displease, not is he ever in his humor: for, in the judgement (beside others, indeed even of
the precise Genevians he has so bin judged, and amongest them allowed to be printed) of
your your most learned wise and honorable kinsman, sir Edward Wotten (who
encouraged and set me first upon this Worke) there are in it so pleasing passages, so
judicious discourses, so delightsome varieties, so perswasive conclusions, such learning
of all sortes, and above all, so elegant a French stile, as (I think) for E SSAYES , I may say
of him, as he, in this Book, did of Homer (Ibid. lib. ii. c. 36); Here shines in him the
greatest wit without example, without exception, deserving for his composition to be
entituled, Sole Maister of Essayes: whose maister-poynt is this, none was before him,
whom he might imitate; none has come after him who could well imitate; or at most
equall him: and a wonder it is, he therein should be perfectest, whereof he is the first
Authour. And for French eloquence, I may adde that of him, which the same Historian
does of Tullie, It broke out in full streames, full beames, under this Prince thereof, Lord of
Montaigne; so as before him you may be delighted with few, but wonder at none, that has
not either seen him, or bin seen of him. His worth then being so eminent, his wit so
excelent, his inventions so rare, his elocutions so ravishing; nor are my pains mis-spent in
translating, nor will your Honours pleasure and leisure be mis-placed or mis-employed in
perusing him. I know, nor this, nor any I have seen, or can conceive, in this or other
language, can in aught be compared to that perfect-unperfect Arcadia, which all our world
yet weepes with you, that your all praise-exceeding father (his praise-succeeding
Countesse) your worthy friend (friend worthiest Lady) lived not to mend or end-it: since
this end we see of it, though at first above all, now is not answerable to the precendents:
and though it were much easier to mend out of an originall and well corrected copie, than
to make-up so much out of a most corrupt, yet see we more marring that was well, then
mending what was amisse. And if not any principal invention, much less may any
translation at second hand come near it: yet as that Worthie did divinely even in French
translating some part of that excellent du Plessis, and (as I have seen) the first septmaine
of the Arch-Poet du Bartas (which good Ladies, be so good to all, as all this age may see,
and after-ages honor) so though we much more meanely do in meaner workes (for still I
say none can anneare him) yet where our Protonotaries do holde the chaire, let us poore
Secondaries not be thrust out of doores. Of this your Honourable goodnesse dooth assure
me, and for this, and much more, I must and ever shall avow my self To your Honours
obliged and devoted in all service, I OHN F LORIO .

To The Right Ho-
norable, Elizabeth Countesse of Rutland.
Thrise-happy Countesse, your thrise-honor’d Sire,
An other Nature, Maro-like, sur-named,
As he in Arte divenest Poems framed,
In love did to a love divine aspire,
In both wrought wonders of Prometheus fire;
So got in kind an of-spring no less famed,
His fame’s enheritrix to be proclaimed;
That got, he got himself one of Heav’ns quire
As then his, and your Mothers match you are
In parents, match, and shall (we hope) in breeding,
England to steade with ancient M ANORS race:
So be you (when we you in praise compare)
As kind, in kindness them as kind succeeding,
Great good-wils gift not great, t’accept with grace.
Il Candido.
¶ To the Honorably-vertuous Lady, La: Penelope
Riche.
Madame, to write of you, and do you right,
What meane we, or what means to ayde meane might?
Since HE, who admirably did endite,
Entiteling you Perfections heir, loves light,
Loves life, Lifes gemme, Vertues court, Heav’ns delight,
Natures chief work, Fair’st book, his Muses spright,
Heav’n on Earth, peerelesse Phoenix, Phoebe bright,
Yet said, he was to seek, of you to write.
Unless your self be of your self devising;
Or that an other such you can inspire.
Inspire you can; but ô none such can be:
Your self as bright as your mid-day, as rising.
Yet, though we but repeat who would flie higher,
And though be but translate, take both in gree.
Il Candido.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER I: OF THE INCONSTANCIE OF OUR ACTIONS





 Send comments and corrections to the
CHAPTER I: OF THE INCONSTANCIE OF OUR ACTIONS
HOSE WHICH exercise themselves in controuling humane actions,
find no such let in any one part as to peece them together and bring
them to one same lustre: For they commonly contradict one another so
strangely, as it seems impossible they should be parcels of one
Warehouse. Young Marias is sometimes found to be the son of
Mars, and other times the child of Venus. Pope Boniface the Eight is
reported to have entered into his charge as a Fox, to have carried
himself therein as a Lion, and to have died like a Dog. And who would think it was
Nero, that lively image of cruelty, who being required to sign (as the custom was) the
sentence of a criminall offender that had been condemned to die, that ever he should
answer, ’Oh would to God I could never have written?’ So neare was his heart grieved to
doom a man to death. The world is so full of such examples that every man may store
himself; and I wonder to see men of understanding trouble themselves with sorting these
parcels: Sithence (me seems) irresolution is the most apparent and common vice of our
nature: as witnesseth that famous verse of Publius the Commedian:

Malum consilium est, quod mutari non potest. -- Pub. Mim.
The counsel is but bad,
Whose change may not be had.
There is some apparence to judge a man by the most common conditions of his life but
seeing the natural instability of our customs and opinions, I have often thought that even
good Authors do ill and take a wrong course, wilfully to opinionate themselves about
framing a constant and solid contexture of us. They chuse an universal air, and
following that image, range and interpret all a mans actions; which if they cannot wrest
sufficiently, they remit them unto dissimulation. Augustus has escaped their hands; for
there is so apparent, so sudden and continual a variety of actions found in him through the
course of his life, that even the boldest Judges and strictest censurers have been faine to
give him over, and leave him undecided. There is nothing I so hardly believe to be in man
as constancy, and nothing so easy to be found in him, as inconstancy. He that should
distinctly and part by part judge of him, should often jumpe to speak truth. View all
antiquity over, and you shall find it a hard matter to chuse out of a dozen of men that
have directed their life unto one certain, setled, and assured course; which is the surest
drift of wisdom. For to comprehend all in one word, says an ancient writer, and to
embrace all the rules of our life into one, it is at all times to will, and not to will one same
thing. I would not vouchsafe (says he) to adde anything: alwayes provided the will be
just: for, if it be unjust, it is impossible it should ever continue one. Verily, I have
heretofore learned that vice is nothing but a disorder and want of measure, and by
consequence it is impossible to fasten constancy unto it. It is a saying of Demosthenes (as
some report) that consultation and deliberation is the beginning of all virtue, and
constancy the end and perfection. If by reason or discourse we should take a certain way,
we should then take the fairest: but no man has thought on it.
Quod petiit, spernit, repetit quod nuper omisit
Astuat, et vitæ disconvenit ordine toto. -- Hor. i. Epist i. 98.
He scornes that which he sought, seek’s that he scorn’d of late,
He flowes, ebbes, disagrees in his lifes whole estate.
Our ordinary manner is to follow the inclination of our appetite this way and that way, in
the left and on the right hand; upward and downeward, according as the winde of
occasions does transport us: we never think on what we would have, but at the instant we
would have it: and change as that beast that takes the colour of the place wherein it is laid.
What we even now purposed we alter by and by, and presently return to out former biase;
all is but changing, motion and inconstancy:

Ducimur ut nervis alienis mobile lignum. -- Hor. ii. Sat. vii. 82.
So are we drawne, as wood is shoved,
By others sinnewes each way moved.
We go not, but we are carried: as things that flote, now gliding gently, now hulling
violently, according as the water is, either stormy or calme.
-------- nonne videmus
Quid sibi quisque relit nescire et quaerere semper,
Commuttare locum quasi onus deponere possit? -- Lucr. iii. 1100.
See we not, every man in his thoughts height
Knowes not what he would have, yet seekes he streight
To change place, as he could lay down his weight?
Every day new toyes, each hour new fantasies, and our humors move and fleet with the
fleetings and movings of time.
Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali Pater ipse
Jupiter auctifero lustravit lumine terras. -- Cic. Fragm.
Such are mens mindes, as that great God of might
Surveies the earth with encrease bearing light.
We float and waver betweene diverse opinions: we will nothing freely, nothing absolutely,
nothing constantly. Had any man prescribed certain Lawes or established assured
policies in his own head, in his life should we daily see to shine an equality of customs,
an assured order and an infallible relation from one thing to another (Empedocles noted
this deformitie to he amongst the Agrigentines, that they gave themselves so over unto
delights as if they should die to morrow next, and built as if they should never die) the
discourse thereof were easy to be made. As is seen in young Cato: He that touched but
one step of it has touched all. It is an harmony of well according tunes and which cannnot
contradict itself. With us it is clean contrary, so many actions, so many particular
judgements are there required. The surest way (in mine opinion) were to refer them unto
the next circumstances, without entering into further search, and without concluding any
other consequence of them. During the late tumultuous broiles of our mangled estate, it
was told me that a young woman not far from me had headlong cast herself out of a
high window, with intent to kill herself, only to avoid the ravishment of a rascally-base
souldier that lay in her house, who offered to force her: and perceiving that with the fall
she had not killed herself, to make an end of her enterprize she would have cut her own
throat with a knife, but that she was hindered by some that came into her: Nevertheless

having sore wounded herself, she voluntarily confessed that the souldier had yet but
urged her with importunate requests, suing solicitations, and golden bribes, but she feared
he would in the end have obtained his purpose by compulsion: by whose earnest speeches,
resolute countenance, and gored blood (a true testimony of her chaste virtue) she might
appeare to be the lively patterne of another Lucrece, yet know I certainly that, both before
that time and afterward, she had been enjoyed of others upon easier composition. And as
the common saying is; Faire and soft, as squemish-honest as she seems, although you
misse of your intent, conclude not rashly an inviolable chastitie to be in your Mistresse;
for a groom or a horse- keeper may find an hour to thrive in; and a dog has a day.
Antigonus having taken upon him to favor a souldier of his by reason of his virtue and
valor, to have great care of him, and see whether they could recover him of a lingering
and inward disease which had long tormented him, who being perfectly cured, he
afterward perceiving him to be nothing so earnest and diligent in his affairs, demanded of
him how he was so changed from himself, and become so cowardish: ’Your self, good
sir,’ answered he, ’have made me so by ridding me of those infirmities which so did grieve
me that I made no accompt of my life.’ A souldier of Lucullus, having by his enemies
been robbed of all he had, to revenge himself undertook a notable and desperat atempt
upon them; and having recovered his losses, Lucullus conceived a very good opinion of
him, and with the greatest shewes of assured trust and loving kindness be could bethinke
himself, made especiall accompt of him, and in any dangerous enterprize seemed to trust
and employ him only:
Verbis quæ timido quoque possent addere mentem./1 -- Hor. ii. Epist ii. 34.
With words, which to a coward might
Adde courage, had he any spright.
"Imploy,’ said he unto him, "some wretch-stripped and robbed Souldier,
------- (quantumvis rusticus ibit, Ibit eo quo vis, qui zonam perdidit, inquit.)
-- 39.
(None is, says he, so clownish, but will-on,
Where you will have him, if his purse be gone)
and absolutely refused to obey him. When we read that Mahomet, having outrageously
rated Chasan, chief leader of his Janizers, because he saw his troup well-nigh defeated by
the Hungarians, and he to behave himself but faintly in the fight, Chasan without
making other reply alone as he was, and without more adoe, with his weapon in his hand
rushed furiously in the thickest throng of his enemies that he first met withall, of whom he
was instantly slain: This, may perhaps be deemed rather a rash conceit than a justification,
and a new spight than a natural prowes. He whom you saw yesterday so boldly venturous,

wonder not if you see him a dastardly meacocke to morrow next: for either anger or
necessitie, company or wine, a sudden fury or the clang of a trumpet, might rowse-up his
heart and stir up his courage. It is no heart nor courage so framed by discourse or
deliberation: These circumstances have setled the same in him: Therefore it is no marvell
if by other contrary circumstance he become a craven and change coppy. This supple
variation and easy yielding contradiction which is scene in us, has made some to
imagine that we had two soules, and others two faculties; whereof every one as best she
pleaseth, accompanieth and does agitate us; the one towards good, the other towards evil.
Forasmuch as such a rough diversitie cannot well sort and agree in one simple subject. The
blast of accidents does not only remove me according to his inclination; for, besides, I
remove and trouble my self by the instability of my posture, and whosoever looketh
narrowly about himself, shall hardly see himself twice in the same state. Sometimes I
give my soul one visage and sometimes another, according unto the posture or side I lay
her in. If I speak diversly of self it is because I looke diversly upon my self. All
contrarieties are found in her, according to some turn or removing, and in some fashion
or other; shamefast, bashfull, insolent, chaste, luxurious, peevish, pratling, silent, foolish,
doting, labourious, nice, delicate, ingenious, slow, dull, froward, humorous, debonaire,
wise, ignorant, false in words, true-speaking, both liberall, covetous, and prodigall. All
these I perceive in some measure or other to be in me, according as I stir or turn my
self; And whosoever shall heedfully survey and consider himself, shall find this
volubility and discordance to be in himself, indeed in his very judgement. I have
nothing to say entirely, simply, and with soliditie of my self, without confusion, disorder,
blending, mingling, and in one word, Distinguo is the most universall part of my logike.
Although I ever purpose to speak good of good, and rather to enterpret those things that
will bear it, unto a good sense; yet is it that the strangenesse of our condition admitteth
that we are often urged to do well by vice itself, if well doing were not judged by the
intention only. Therefore may not a courageous act conclude a man to be valiant. He that
is so, when just occasion serveth, shall ever be so, and upon all occasions. If it were an
habitude of virtue, and not a sudden humor, it would make a man equally resolute at all
assayes, in all accidents: Such alone, as in company; such in a single combat, as in a set
battle: For, whatsoever some say, valor is all likewise, and not one in the street or town,
and another in the campe or field. As courageously should a man bear a sicknesse in his
hed as a hurt in the field, and fear death no more at home in his house than abroad in an
assault. We should not then see one same man enter the breach, or charge his enemy with
an assured and undouted fiercenesse, and afterward having escaped that, to vexe, to grive
and torment himself like unto a seely woman, or faint-hearted milkesop for the loss of a
sute, or death of a child. If one chance to be carelesly base-minded in his infancie, and
constantly-resolute in povertie; if he be timorously-fearfull at sight of a barbers razor, and
afterward stowtly-undismayed against his enemies swords: the action is commendable, but
not the man. Divers Greeks (says Cicero) cannot endure to looke their enemy in the
face, yet are they most constant in their sicknesses; whereas the Cimbrians and
Celtiberians are meere contrary. Nihil enim potest esse aequabile, quod non a certa
ratione proficiscatur: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. ii. f.) ’For nothing can bear itself even which

proceedeth not from resolved reason.’ There is no valor more extreme in his kind than
that of Alexander; yet it is but in species, nor every where sufficiently full and universall.
As incomparable as it is, it has his blemishes, which is the reason that in the idlest of
suspitions he apprehendeth at the conspiracies of his followers against his life, we see him
so earnestly to vex and trouble himself: In search and pursuit of whereof he demeaneth
himself with so vehement and indiscreet an injustice, and with such a demiss fear that
even his natural reason is thereby subverted. Also the superstition wherewith he is so
thoroughly tainted beareth some show of pusilanimitie. And the unlimited excess of the
repentance he showed for the murther of Clitus is also a witness of the inequalitie of his
courage. Our matters are but parcels hudled up and peeces patched tog ether, and we
endeavor to acquire honor by false means and untrue tokens. Vertue will not be
followed but by herself: and if at any time we borrow her maske, upon some other
occasion she will as soone pull it from our face. It is a lively hew and strong die, if the
soul be once dyed with the same perfectly, and which will never fade or be gone, except
it carry the skin away with it. Therefore to judge a man, we must a long time follow, and
very curiously marke his steps; whether constancy do wholy subsist and continue upon
her own foundation in him. Cui vivendi via considerata atque provisa est (Cic. Parad.
v.). ’Who has forecast and considered the way of life;’ whether the variety of occurrences
make him change his pace (I meane his way, for his pace may either be hastened or
slowed) let him run on: such a one (as sayeth the imprease of our good Talbot) goeth
before the wind. It is no marvell (says an old writer) that hazard has such power over us,
since we live by hazard. It is impossible for him to dispose of his particular actions, that
bath not in grose directed his life unto one certain end. It is impossible for him to range
all peeces in order, that has not a plot or form of the totall frame in his head. What
avayleth the provision of all sorts of colours unto one that knowes not what be is to draw?
No man makes any certain designe of his life, and we deliberate of it but by parcels. A
skilfull archer ought first to know the marke he aimeth at, and then apply his hand, his
bow, his string, his arrow and his motion accordingly. Our counsels go astray because
they are not rightly addressed, and have no fixed end. No winde makes for him that has
no intended port to saile unto. As for me, I allow not greatly of that judgement which
some made of Sophocles, and to have concluded him sufficient in the managing of
domesticall matters, against the accusation of his own son, only by the sight of one of
his tragedies. Nor do I commend the conjecture of the Parians sent to reforme the
Milesians, as sufficient to the consequence they drew thence. In visiting and surveying the
ile, they marked the landes that were best husbanded, and observed the country houses
that were, best governed. And having registered the names of their owners, and afterward
made an assembly of the Townesmen of the City, they named and instituted those owners
as new Governours and Magistrates, judging and concluding, that being good husbands
and careful of their housebold affairs, they must consequently be so of public matters.
We are all framed of flaps and patches and of so shapelesse and diverse a contexture that
every peece and every moment playeth his part. And there is as much difference found
betweene us and ourselves as there is betweene ourselves and other. Magnam rem puta,
unun hominem agere: ’Esteeme it a great matter to play but one man.’ Since ambition may

teach men both valor temperance, liberality, indeed justice: sith covetousnesse may settle
in the mind of a Shop-prentise-boy, brought up in ease and idlenesse, a dreadlesse
assurance to leave his home-bred ease, and forgoe his place of education, and in a small
barke to yield himself unto the mercy of blustring waves, mercilesse winds and
wrathfull Neptune; and that it also teacheth discretion and wisdom; And that Venus
herself ministreth resolution and hardinesse unto tender youth as yet subject to the
discipline of the rod, and teacheth the ruthless Souldier the soft and tenderly effeminate
heart of women in their mothers laps:
Hac duce custodes furtim transgressa jacentes,
Adjuvenem tenebris sola puella venit. -- Tib. ii. El. i. 75.
The wench by stealeth her lodg’d guards having stript,
By this guide, sole, i’th darke, to’ th yonker skipt.
It is no part of a well-grounded judgement simply to judge ourselves by our exterior
actions: A man must thorowly sound himself, and dive into his heart, and there see by
what wards or springs the motions stir. But forasmuch as it is a hazardous and high
enterprise, I would not have so many to meddle with it as do.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER II: OF DRUNKENESSE

Note on the e-text: this text was provided by Ben R. Schneider, Lawrence




CHAPTER II: OF DRUNKENESSE
HE WORLD is nothing but variety and dissemblance. Vices are all
likewise, inasmuch as they are all vices: And so do perhaps the Stoics
meane it. But though they are equally vices, they are not equall vices;
and that he who has started a hundred steps beyond the limits
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum, --Hor. i. Sat. i. 107.
On this side, or beyond the which
No man can hold a right true pitch,
is not of worse condition than he that is ten steps short of it, is no whit credible: and that
sacrilege is not worse than the stealing of a colewort out of a garden.
Nec vincet ratio, tantumdem ut peccet, idemque,

Qui teneros caules alieni fregerit horti,
Et qui nocturnus divum sacra legerit. -- Sat. iii. 115
No reason can evict, as great or same sinne taints
Him that breakes in anothers Garden tender plants,
And him that steales by night things consecrate to Saints.
There is as much diversity in that as in any other thing. The confusion of order and
measure of crimes is dangerous: Murtherers, Traitors and Tyrants, have too much gain by
it: it is no reason their conscience should be eased, in that some other is either idle or
lascivious, or less assiduous unto devotion. Every man poiseth upon his fellowes sinne,
and elevates his own. Even teachers do often range it ill in my conceit. As Socrates said,
that the chiefest office of wisdom was to distinguish goods and evils. We others, to
whom the best is ever in vice, should say the like of knowledge, to distinguish vices.
Without which, and that very exact, both vertuous and wicked men remaine confounded
and unknowen. Now drunkennesse amongst others, appeareth to me a grose and brutish
vice. The mind has more part else where; and some vices there are, which (if it may
lawfully be spoken) have a kind of I wot not what generosity in them. Some there are,,
that have learning, diligence, valor, prudence, wit, cunning, dexterity, and subtlety
joined with them; whereas this is merely corporall, and terrestriall. And the grosest and
rudest nation, that liveth amongst us at this day, is only that which keepeth it in credit.
Other vices but alter and distract the understanding, whereas this utterly subverteth the
same, and astonishes the body.
---- cum vini vis penetravit,
Consequitur gravitas membrorum, præpediuntur
Crura vacillanti, tardescit lingua, madet mens,
Nant oculi, clamor, sigultis, jurgia gliscunt. -- Lucr. iii. 479.
When once the force of wine has inly pierst,
Limbes-heaviness is next, legs faine would go,
But reeling cannot, tongue drawles, mindes disperst,
Eyes swimme, ciries, hickups, brables grow.
The worst estate of man, is where he loses the knowledge and government of himself.
And amongst other things, it is, said, that as must wine boyling and working in a vessell,
workes and sends upward what ever it containeth in the bottome, so does wine cause those
that drinke excessively of it, work up, and breake out their most concelaed secrets.
----tu sapientium
Curas, et arcanum jocoso
Consilium retegis Lyæo. -- Hor. iii. Od. xxi. 14.

Thou (wine-cup) doest by wine reveale
The cares, which wise men would conceal,
And close drifts, at a merry meale.
Josephus reporteth that by making an Ambassador to tipple-square, whom his enemies
had sent unto him, he wrested all his secrets out of him. Nevertheless Augustus having
trusted Lucius Piso, that conquered Thrace, with the secretest affairs he had in hand, had
never cause to be discontented with him; nor Tiberius with Cossus, to whom he imparted
all his seriousest counsels, although we know them both to have so given themselves to
drinking of wine that they were often faine to be carried from the Senat, and both were
reputed notable drunkards.
-------- Hesterno inflatum venas de more Lyæo -- Virg. Buc. Ec. vi. 15.
Veines pufft up, as it used alway
By wine which was dranke yesterday.
And as faithfully as the complot and purpose to kill Cæsar committed unto Cimber, who
would daily be drunke with quaffing of wine, as unto Cassius, that drunke nothing but
water, whereupon he answered very pleasantly, ’What! shall I bear a tyrant that am not
able to bear wine?’ We see our carowsing tospot German soldiers, when they are most
plunged in their cups and as drunke as rats, to have perfect remembrance of their quarter,
of the watchword, and of their files.
-------- Nec facilis victoria de madidis, et
Bloesis, atque mero titubantibus. -- Juven. Sat. xv. 47.
Nor is the conquest easy of men sow’st,
Lisping and reeling with wine they carow’st.
I would never have beleeved so sound, so deepe and so excessive drunkennesse had I not
read in histories that Attalus having envited to sup with him (with intent to do him some
notable indignity) the same Pausanias who for the same cause killed afterward Philip,
King of Macedon (a king, who by the eminent fair qualities that were in him, bore a
testimony of the education he had learned in the house and company of Epaminondas),
made him so dead-drunke that insensibly and without feeling he might prostitute his
beauty as the body of a common hedge-harlot, to Mulettiers, Groomes and many of the
abject servants of his house. And what a lady (whom I much honor and highly esteeme)
told me, protesting that near Bourdeaux, towards Castres, where her house is, a widdow
country-woman, reputed very chaste and honest, suspecting herself to be with child, told
her neighbors that had she a husband she should verily think she was with child; but
the occasion of this suspition increasing more and more, and perceiving herseIfe so big-

bellied that she could no longer conceal it, she resolved to make the Parish-priest
acquainted with it, whom she entreated to publish in the Church that whosover he were
that were guilty of the fact, and would avow it, she would freely forgive him, and if he
were so pleased, take him to her husband. A certain swaine or hyne-boy of hers,
emboldened by this proclamation, declared how that having one holliday found her
welltippled with wine, and so sound asleep by the chimnie side lying so fit and ready for
him, without awaking her he had the full use of her body. Whom she accepted for her
husband, and both live together at this day. It is assured that antiquitie has not greatly
described this vice. The compositions of diverse Philosophers speak but sparingly of it.
Yea, and some of the Stoics deem it not amisse for man sometimes to take his liquor
roundly, and drinke drunke, thereby to recreate his spirits.
Hoc quoque virtutum quondam certamine magnum
Socratem pa lmam promeruisse ferunt. -- Cor. Gal. El. i.
They say, in this too, Socrates the wise,
And great in vertues combats, bare the prize.
Cato, that strict censurer and severe corrector of others, has been reproved for much
drinking,
Narratur et prisci Catonis Saepe mero coluisse virtus. -- Hor. iii. Od. xxi.
11.
’Tis said, by use of wine repeated
Old Catoes virtue oft was heated.
Cyrus, that so far-renowned king, amongst his other commendations, meaning to prefer
himself before his brother Artaxerxes, and get the start of him, aleageth that he could
drinke better and tipple more than he. And amongst the best policed and formalest nations,
the custom of drinking and pledging of healths was much in use. I have heard Silvius,
that excellelent phisitian of Paris, affirme that to preserve the vigor of our stomake from,
empairing, it is not amisse once a month to rowze up the same by this excess of drinking,
and lest it should grow dull and stupid thereby to stir it up. And it is written that the
Persians, after they had well tippled, were wont to consult of their chiefest affairs. My
taste, my rellish, and my complexion are sharper enemies unto this vice than my
discourse, for besides that I captivatee more easily my conceits under the auctoritie of
ancient opinions, indeed I find it to be a foolish, a stupid, and a base kind of vice, but less
malicious and hurtful than others; all which shocke and with a sharper edge wound
public societie. And if we cannot give ourselves any pleasure except (as they say) it cost
us something; I find this vice to be less chargeable unto our conscience than others;
besides it is not hard to be prepared, difficult to be found; a consideration not to be

despised. A man well advanced in years and dignitie, amongst three principal
commodities he told me to have remaining in life, counted this: and where shall a man
more rightly find it than amongst the natural? But he took it ill, delicatenesse, and the
choice of wines is therein to be avoided. If you prepare your voluptuousness to drinke it
with pleasure and daintily neat, you tie your self unto an inconvenience to drinke it other
than is alwayes to be had. A man must have a milder, a loose and freer taste. To be a true
drinker a man should not have so tender and squeamish a palat. The Germans do in a
manner drinke equally of all sorts of wine with like pleasure. Their end is rather to gulpe it
down freely than to tast it kindly. And to say truth they have it better cheape. Their
voluptuousness is more plenteous and fuller. Secondarily, to drinke after the French
manner, as two droughts and moderately, is over much to restraine the favors of that
God. There is more time and constancy required thereunto. Our forefathers were wont to
spend whole nights in that exercise, indeed often times they joined whole long dayes unto
them. And a man must proportion his ordinary more large and firme. I have in my dayes
seen a principal Lord, a man of great employment and enterprises and famous for good
success, who without straining himself and eating but an ordinary meales-meate, was
wont to drinke little less than five pottles of wine, yet at his rising seemed to be nothing
distempered, but rather, as we have found to our no small cost in managing our affairs,
over-wise and considerate. The pleasure of that whereof we would make account in the
course of our life ought to be employed longer space. It were necessary, as shop-boyes or
labouring people, that we should refuse no occasion to drinke and continually to have this
desire in our mind. It seems that we daily shorten the use of this, and that in our
houses (as I have seen in mine infancie) breakfasts, nunchions, and beavers should be
more frequent and often used than now adayes they are. And should we thereby in any
sort proceed towards amendment? No verily. But it may be that we have much more given
ourselves over unto paillardise and all manner of luxurie than our fathers were. They are
two occupations that enter-hinder one another in their vigor. On the one side it has
empaired and weakned our stomacke, and on the other sobrietie serveth to make us more
jolly-quaint, lusty, and wanton for the exercise of love matters. It is a wonder to think on
the strange tales I have heard my father report of the chastitie of his time. He might well
speak of it as he that was both by art and nature proper for the use and solace of ladies.
He spake little and well, few words, but to the purpose, and was ever wont to entermixe
some ornament taken from vulgar bookes, and above all Spanish amongst his common
speeches. And of all Spanish authors, none was more familiar unto him than Marcus
Aurelius. His demeanour and carriage was ever mild, meeke, gentle, and, very modest,
and above all grave and stately. There is nothing he seemed to be more careful of than of
his honesty, and observe a kind of decencie of his person, and orderly decorum in his
habits, were it on foot or on horsebacke. He was exceeding nice in performing his word or
promise. And so strictly concscientious and obsequious in religion, that generally he
seemed to incline toward superstition than the contrary. Though he were but a little man,
his courage and vigor was great. He was of an upright and well proportioned stature, of a
pleasing, cheerfull-Iooking countenance, of a swarthy hue, nimbly addicted, and
exquisitely nimble unto all noble and gentleman-like exercises. I have seen some hollow

staves of his filled with lead which he wont to use and exercise his arms withall, the
better to enable himself to pitch the barre, to throw the sledge, to cast the pole, and to
play at fence; and shoes with leaden soles, which he wore to ensure himself to leape, to
vault, and to run. I may without blushing say, that in memory of himself, he has left
certain petie miracles amongst us. I have seen him when he was past threescore years of
age mocke at all our sports, and out-countenance our youthfull pastimes, with a heavy
furr’d gowne about him to leap into his saddle. To make the pommada round about a table
upon his thumb, and seldom to ascend any staires without skipping three or four steps at
once. And concerning my discourse, he was wont to say that in a whole province there
was scarce any woman of quality that had an ill name. He would often report strange
familiarities, namely of his own, with very honest women, without any suspicion at all.
And protested very religiously that when he was married he was yet a pure virgine; yet
had he long time followed the wars beyond the mountaines, and therein served long,
whereof he has left a Journall-book of his own collecting, wherein he has particularly
noted whatsoever happened day by day worthy the observation so long as he served, both
for the public and his particular use. And he was well strucken in years when he took a
wife. For returning out of Italie in the yeare of our Lord one thousand five hundred eight
and twenty, and being full three and thirty years old by the way he chose himself a wife.
But come we to our drinking again. The incommodities of age wbich need some helpe
and refreshing, might with some reason beget in me a desire or longing of this faculty, for
it is in a man the last pleasure which the course of our years stealeth upon us. Good
fellowes say that natural heat is first taken in our feet: that properly belongeth to infancie.
From thence it ascendeth unto the middle region, where it is setled and contitlueth a long
time, and in mine opinion there produces the only true and moving pleasures of this
corporall life. Other delight and sensualities in respect of t hat do but sleepe. In the end,
like unto a vapour which by little and little exhaleth and mounteth aloft, it comes unto the
throat and there makes her last bode. Yet could I never conceive how any man may either
encrease or prolong the pleasure of drinking beyond thirst, and in his imagination frame
an artificial appetite, and against nature. My stomacke could not well reach so far: it is
very much troubled to come to an end of that which it takes for his need. My constitution
is to make no accompt of drinking but to succeed meat, and therefore do I ever make my
last draught the greatest. And forasmmuch as in age we have the roofe of our mouthes
covered with rhume, or distempered, distated and altered through some other evil
constitution, wine seems better unto us and of a quicker relish, according as our pores be
either more or less open and washed. At least I seldom relish the same very well, except
it be the first drought I take. Anacharsis wondered to see the Greeks drinke in greater
glasses at the end of their meales than in the beginning. It was (as I imagine) for the very
same reason that the Germans do it, who never begin to carouse but when they have well
fed. Plato forbiddeth children to drinke any wine before they be eighteene years of age,
and to be drunke before they come to forty. But to such as have once attained the age of
fortie he is content to pardon them, if they chance to delight themselves with it, and
alloweth them somwhat to blend the influence of Dionysius in their banquets, that good
God, who bestoweth cheerfulnesse upon men, and youth unto aged men, who layeth and

aswageteh the passions of the mind, even as yron is made flexible by the fire: and in his
profitable laws holds drinking- meetings or quaffing companies as necessary and
commendable (alwaies provided there be a chief leader amongst them to containe and
order them) drunkennesse being a good and certain tryall of every mans nature; and
therewithall proper to give aged men the courage to make merry in dancing and music;
things alowable and profitable, and such as they dare not undertake being sober and
settled: That wine is capable to supply the mind with temperance and the body with
health. Notwithstanding, these restrictions, partly borrowed of the Carthaginians, please
him well. Let those forbeare it that are going about any expedition of war. Let every
magistrate and all judges abstain from it at what time they are to execute their charge, and
to consult of public affairs. Let none bestow the day in drinking, as the time that is due
unto more serious negotiations, nor the nights wherein a man intendeth to get children. It
is reported that Stilpo the Philosopher, finding himself surcharged with age, did
purposely hasten his end by drinking of with pure wine. The like cause (though not
wittingly) did also suffocate the vital forces, crazed through old age, of the Philosopher
Arcesilaus. But it is an old and pleasant question whether a wise mans mind were like to
yield unto the force of wine.
Si munitae adhibet vim sapientiæ. -- Od. xxviii. 4.
If unresisted force it bends,
Gainst wisdom which itself defends.
Unto what vanity does the good opinion we have of ourselves provoke us? The most
temperate and perfectest mind of the world findes it too great a taske to keep herself
upright, lest she fall by her own weaknesse. Of a thousand there is not one perfectly
righteous and settled but one instant of her life, and question might be made whether
according to her natural condition she might at any time be so. But to join constancy
unto it [is] her last perfection: I meane if nothing should shocke her; which a thousand
accidents may do. Lucretius, that famous Poet, may philosophie and bandie at his
pleasure: See where be lieth senslesse of an amorous potion. Thinkes any man that an
apoplexie cannot as soone astonish Socrates as a poore labouring man? Some of them
have by the force of a sicknesse forgot their own names, and a slight hurt has overthrown
the judgement of others. Let him be as wise as he can, in the end he is but a man; what is
more fraile, more miserable, or more vain? Wisdome forceth not our natural conditions.
Sudores itaque, et pallorem existere toto
Corpore, et infringi linguam, vocemque aboriri
Caligare, oculos, sonari aures, succidere art us,
Denique concidere ex animi terrore videmus. -- Lucr. iii. 155.
We see therefore, paleness and sweats oregrow

Our bodies, tongues do falter, voice does breake,
Eyes dazle, ears buzze, joints do shrinke below,
Lastly we swoune by hart-fright, terrours weake.
He must [s]eele his eyes against the blow that threateneth him; being. near the brimme
of a precipice, he must cry out like a child: Nature having purposed to reserve these light
markes other aucthoritie unto herself, inexpugnable unto our reason, and to the Stoice
virtue: to teach him his mortalitie and our insipiditie. He waxeth pale for fear, be
blusheth for shame, he groaneth feeling the cholike, if not with a desperate and lowd-
roaring voice, yet with a low, smothered, and hoarse-sounding noise.
Humani a se nihil alienum putat. -- Ter. Heaut. act. i. sc. i. 25.
He thinkes, that nothing strange be can
To him, that longs to any man.
Giddie-headed Poets, that faine what they list, dare not so much as discharge their
Heroes from tears.
Sic fatur lachrymans, classigue immitit habemas. -- Virg. Æn. vi. 1.
So said he weeping, and so said,
Himselfe hand to the sterage laide.
Let it suffice him to bridle his affections, and moderate his inclinations; for it is not in
him to bear them away. Plutarke himself, who is so perfect and excellent a judge of
human actions, seeing Brutus and Torquatus to kill their own children, remaineth
doubtfull whether virtue could reach so far and whether such men were not rather moved
by some other passion. All actions beyond the ordinary limits are subject to some sinister
interpretation. Forasmuch as our taste does no more come unto that which is above it, than
to that which is under it. Let us omit that other sect which maketh open profession of
fierceness. But when in the very same sect which is esteemed the most demiss, we hear
the bragges of Metrodorus: Occupavite, Fortuna, atqe cepi; omnesque aditus tuos
interclusi, ut ad me amirare non posses: (Metr. Cic. Tusc. Quest. 5.) ’Fortune, I have
prevented, caught, and overtaken you: I have mured and ramd up all your passages,
whereby you mightest attaine unto me:1 When Anaxarchus, by the appointment of
Nicocreon, the tyrant of Cipres, being laid along in a trough of stone, and smoten with
yron sledges, ceaseth not to crie out, ’Streeke, smite and breake; it is not Anaxarchus, it is
but his veil you martyr so:’ When we hear our martyrs in the middst of a flame crie
aloud unto the Tyrant, ’This side is roasted enough, chop it, eat it, it is full roasted, now
begin on the other:’ When in Josephus we here a child all to rent with biting snippers,
and pierced with the breath of Antiochus, to d fie him to death, crie with a lowde-assured

and undismaid voice, ’Tyrant, you losest time, lo I am still at mine ease; where is that
smarting pain, where are those torments wherewith whilom you didst so threaten me?
My constancy does more trouble you than I have feeling of your crueltie: Oh faint hearted
varlet, doest you yield when I gather strength? Make me to faint or shrinke, cause me to
moan or lament, force me to yield and sue for grace if you canst; encourage your
satallities, hard en your executioners; lo how they droope and have no more power; arm
them, strengthen them, flesh them.’ Verely we must needs confesse there is some
alteration, and some fury (how holy soever) in those mindes, When we come unto these
Stoic evasions: I had rather be furious than voluptuous: the saying of Antisthenes,
Μανειην αλλον η ησθειην (Antist. Diogen. Laert. vi. c. 1.) ’Rather would I be mad
than merry;’ when Sextius telleth us, he had rather be surprised with pain than sensuality;
when Epicurus undertakes to have the goute to wantonize and faune upon him, and
refuseth ease and health, with a hearty cheerefullnesse defie all evils, and scornefully
despising less sharpe griefs disdaining to grapple with them, he blithely desires and
calleth for sharper, more forcible and worthy of him.
Spumantemque dari, pecora inter inertia, votis
Optat aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte leonem: -- Virg. Æn. iv. 158.
He wisht, mongst hartlesse beasts some foming Bore,
Or mountaine-Lyon would come down and rore;
Who would not judge them to be prankes of a courage removed from his wonted seate?
Our mind cannot out of her place attaine so higb. She must quit it and raise herself aloft,
and taking the bridle in her teeth, carry and transport her man so far, that afterward he
wonder at himself, and rest amazed at his actions. As in exploit of war, the heat and
earnestnesse of the fight does often provoke the noble minded soldiers to adventure on so
dangerous passages that afterward being better advised, they are the first to wonder at it.
As also Poets are often surprised and rapt with admiration at their own labours, and
forget the trace by which they pass so happy a career. It is that which some terme a fury or
madnesse in them. And as Plato says that a setled and reposed man does in vain knocke
at Poesies gate; Aristotle likewise says that no excellent mind is freely exempted from
some or other entermixture of folly. And be has reason to call any starting or
extraordinarie conceit (how commendable soever) and which exceedeth our judgement
and discourse, folly. Forasmuch as wisdom is an orderly and regular managing of the
mind, and which; she addresseth with measure, and conducteth with proportion; and
taketh her own word for it. Plato disputeth thus: that the facultie of prophesying and
divination is far above us, and that when we treat it, we must be besides ourselves: our
wisdom must be darkened and over shadowed by sleepe, by sicknesse, or by
drowzinesse; or by some celestial fury, ravished from her own seat.




Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER III: A CUSTOME OF THE ILE OF CEA






CHAPTER III: A CUSTOME OF THE ILE OF CEA
F, AS some say, to philosophate be to doubt; with much more reason to
rave and fantastiquize, as I do, must necessarily be to doubt: For, to
enquire and debate belongeth to a scholler, and to resolve appertaines
to a cathedrall master. But know, my cathedrall, it is the authority of
Gods divine will, that without any contradiction does sway us, and has
her rank beyond these humane and vain contestations. Philip being
with an armed band entered the countrie of Peloponnesus, some one told Damidas the
Lacedemonians were like to endure much if they sought not to reobtaine his lost favor.
’Oh varlet as you are (answered he). And what can they suffer who have no fear at all of
death?’ Agis being demanded, how a man might do to live free, answered; ’Despising and
contemning to die.’ These and a thousand like propositions, which concurre in this
purpose, do evidently inferre some thing beyond patient expecting of death itself to be
suffered in this life: witness the Lacedemonian child, taken by Antigonus, and sold for a
slave, who urged by his master to perform some abject service; ’Thou shall see (said he)
whom you hast bought, for it were a shame for me to serve, having liberty so near at
hand;’ and therewithall threw himself headlong down from the top of the house.
Antipater, sharply threatning the Lacedemonians, to make them yield to a certain request

of his; they answered, should you menace us worse than death, we will rather die. And
to Philip, who having written unto them that he would hinder all their enterprises; ’What?
(say they) wilt you, also hinder us from dying?’ That is the reason why some say that the
wise man liveth as long as he ought, and not so long as he can. And that the favourablest
gift nature has bequeathed us, and which removeth all means from us to complain of
our condition, is, that she has left us the key of the fields. She has appointed but one
entrance unto life, but many a thousand ways out of it: Well may we want ground to live
upon, but never ground to die, in; as Boiocalus answered the Romanes. Why do you
complain against this world? It does not containe you: If you livest in pain and sor row,
your base courage is the cause of it. To die there wanteth but will.
Ubique mors est. optime hoc cavit Deus,
Eripere vitam memo non homini potest:
At nemo mortem: mille ad hanc aditus patent. -- Sen. Theb. act. i. sc. I.
Each where death is: God did this well purvey,
No man but can from man life take away,
But none bars death, to it lies many a way.
And it is not a receipt to one malady alone; Death is a remedy against all evils: It is a
most assured haven, never to be feared, and often to be sought: All comes to one period,
whether man make an end of himself, or whether he endure it; whether he run before his
day, or whether he expect it: whence soever it come, it is ever his own, where ever the
threed be broken, it is all there, it’s the end of the web. The voluntariest death is the fairest.
Life dependeth on the will of others, death on ours. In nothing should we so much
accommodate ourselves to our humors as in that. Reputation does nothing concerne such
an enterprise, it is folly to have any respect unto it. To live is to serve, if the liberty to dye
be wanting. The common course of curing any infirmitie is ever directed at the charge of
life: we have incisions made into us, we are cauterized, we have limbs cut and mangled,
we are let blood, we are dieted. Goe we but one step further, we need no more physicke,
we are perfectly whole. Why is not our jugular or throat-veine as much at our command as
the mediane? To extreme sicknesses, extreme remedies. Servius the Grammarian being
troubled with the gowt, found no better means to be rid of it than to apply poison to
mortifie his legs. He cared not whether they were Podagrees or no, so they were
insensible. God gives us sufficient privilege, when be placeth us in such an estate, as life
is worse than death unto us. It is weaknesse to yield to evils, but folly to foster them. The
Stoics say it is a convenient natural life, for a wise man, to forgoe life, although he
abound in all happinesse, if he do it opportunely: And for a foole to prolong his life,
albeit he be most miserable, provided he be in most part of things, which they say to be
according unto nature; As I offend not the laws made against theeves when I cut mine
own purse, and carry away my own goods; nor of destroyers when I burne my own
wood; so am I nothing tied unto laws made against m urtherers, if I deprive my self of
my own life. Hegesias was wont to say, that even as the condition of life, so should the

quality of death depend on our election. And Diogenes meeting with the Philosopher
Speusippus, long time afflicted with the dropsie, and therefore carried in a litter, who cried
out unto him, All haile Diogenes: And to you no health at all (replied Diogenes), that
endurest to live in so wretched an estate. True it is, that a while after, Speusippus, as
overtired with so languishing a condition of life, compassed his own death. But this
goeth not without some contradiction: For many are of opinion, that without the express
commandment of him that has placed us in this world, we may by no means forsake the
garrison of it, and that it is in the hands of God only, who therein bath placed us, not for
ourselves alone, but for his glory, and others services when ever it shall please him to
discharge us hence, and not for us to take leave: That we are not borne for ourselves, but
for our Countrie: The Lawes for their own interest require an accompt at our hands for
ourselves, and have a just action of murther against us. Else as forsakers of our own
charge, we are punished in the other world.
Proxima deinde tenent maesti loca, qui sibi lethum
Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi
Projecere animas. -- Virg. Æn. vi. 434.
Next place they lamentable hold in hell,
Whose hand their death caused causelesse, (but not well)
And hating life did thence their soules expell.
There is more constancy in using the chaine that holds us than in breaking the same;
and more trial of stedfastnesse in Regulus than in Cato. It is indiscretion and impatience
that hastneth our way. No accidents can force a man to turn his backe from lively virtue:
She seeketh out evils and sorrowes as her nourishment. The threats of fell tyrants, tortures
and torments, executioners and torturers, do animate and quicken her.
Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus
Nigræ feraci frondis in Algido
Per damna, per cædes, ab ipso
Ducit opes animumque fero. -- Hor. iv. Od. iv. 57.
As holme-tree does with hard axe lopt
On hils with many holme-trees topt,
From loss, from cuttings it does feel,
Courage and store rise ev’n from steele,
And as the other says,
Non est putas virtus, pater,
Timere vitam, sed malis ingentibus

Obstare, nec se vertereac vetro dare. -- Sen. Theb. act. i. sc. I.
Sir, ’tis not virtue, as you understand,
To fear life, but grosse mischief to withstand,
Not to retire, turn backe, at any hand.
Rebus in adversis facile est contemnere mortem.
Fortius ille facit, qui miser esse potest. -- Mart. xi. Ep. lvii. 15.
Tis easy in crosse chance death to despise:
He that can wretched be, does stronger rise.
It is the part of cowardlinesse, and not of virtue, to seek to squat itself in some hollow
lurking hole, or to hide herself under some massie tombe, thereby to shun the strokes of
fortune. She never forsakes her course, nor leaves her way, what stormie weather soever
crosse her.
Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impa vidam ferient ruinæ. -- Hor. iii. Od. iii. 7.
If the world broken should upon her fall,
The ruines may her strike, but not appall.
The avoyding of other inconveniences does most commonly drive us into this, indeed,
sometimes the shunning of death makes us to run into it.
Hic, rogo, non furor est, ne moriare, mori? -- Mart. ii. Epig. lxxx. 2.
Madnesse is’t not, say I,
To dye, lest you should dye?
As those who for fear, of a break-necke down-fall, do headlong cast themselves into it.
--- multos in summa pericula misit
Venturi timor ipse mali fortissimus ille est,
Qui promptus metuenda pati, si cominus instent,
Et diferre potest. -- Lucan. vii. 104.
The very fear of ils to come, has sent
Many to mighty dangers: strongest they,
Who fearfull things t’endure are ready bent

If they confront them, yet can them delay.
---usque adeo mortisformidine, vitæ
Percepit humanos odium, lucisqe videndæ,
Ut sibi consciscant maerenti pectore lethum,
Obliti fonte currarum hunc esse timorem. -- Lucr. iii. 79.
So far by fear of death, the hate of life,
And seeing light, does men as men possesse,
They grieving kill themselves to end the strife,
Forgetting, fear is spring of their distresse.
Plato in his Lawes, alots him that has deprived his neerest and deerest friend of life
(that is to say, himself) and abridged him of the destinies course, not constrained by any
public judgement, nor by any lewd and inevitable accident of fortune, nor by any
intolerable shame or infamy, but through basenesse of mind, and weakenesse of a faint-
fearful courage, to have a most ignominious and ever-reproachfull burial. And the
opinion which disdaineth our life is ridiculous: For in fine it is our being. It is our all in
all. Things that have a nobler and richer being nay accuse ours: But it is against nature, we
should despise, and carelesly set ourselves at naught: It is a particular infirmitie, and,
which is not seen in any other creature, to hate and disdaine himself. It is of like vanity,
that we desire to be other than we are. The fruit of such a desire does not concerne us,
forasmuch as it contradicteth and hindereth itself in itself. He that desires to be made
of a man an Angell does nothing for himself: He should be nothing the better by it: And
being no more, who shall rejoice or conceive any gladnesse of this change or amendment
for him?
Debet enim misere cui forte ægreque futuram est,
Ipse quoque esse in eo tum tempore, cum male possit
Accidere. -- Ibid. 905.
For he, who shall perchance prove miserable,
And speed but ill, should then himself be able
To be himself, when ils may chance unstable.
The security, indolencie, impassibility, and privation of this lifes evils, which we
purchase at the price of death, bring us no cornmoditie at all. In vain does he avoid war
that cannot enjoy peace; and bootlesse does he shun pain that has no means to feel
rest. Amongst those of the first opinion, great questioning has been, to know what
occasions are sufficiently just and lawfull to make a man undertake the killing of himself,
they call that ευλογον εζαγωγην (Alex. Aphrod.) a reasonable orderly out-let. For,
although they say a man must often dye for slight causes, since these that keep us alive

are not very strong; yet is some measure required in them. There are certain fantastic
and brainesicke humors, which have not only provoked particular men, but whole Nations
to defeat themselves. I have heretofore aleaged some examples of them: And moreover we
read of certain Milesian virgins, who upon a furious conspiracie hanged themselves one
after another, until such time as the Magistrate provided for it, appointing that such as
should be found so hanged, should with their own halters be dragged naked through the
streets of the citie. When Threicion perswadeth Cleomenes to kill himself, by reason of
the bad and desperate estate his affairs stood in, and having escaped a more honorable
death in the battle which he had lately lost, moveth him to accept of this other, which is
second to him in honor, and give the Conqueror no leisure to make him endure, either
another death, or else a shamefull life, Cleomenes, with a Lacedemonian and Stoike
courage, refuseth this counsell as base and effeminate: It is a receipt (says he) which can
never faile me, and whereof a man should make no use, so long as there remaineth but one
inch of hope: That to live, is sometimes constancy and valor; That he will have his very
death serve his Countrie, and by it show an act of honor and of virtue. Threicion then
beleeved, and killed himself. Cleomenes did afterwards as much, but not before he had
tried and assayed the utmost power of fortune. All inconveniencies are not so much worth
that a man should dye to eschue them. Moreover, there being so many sudden changes and
violent alterations in humane things, it is hard to judge in what state or point we are justly
at the end of our hope:
Sperat et in saeva victus gladiator arena,
Sit licet infesto pollice turba minax.
The Fencer hopes, though down in lists he lie,
And people with turn’d hand threat’s he must dye.
All things, says an ancient Proverb, may a man hope for so long as he liveth: indeed, but
answereth Seneca, why shall I rather have that in mind; that fortune can do all
things for him that is living, than this; that fortune has no power at all over him who
knows how to dye? Josephus is seen engaged in so apparent-approaching danger, with
a whole nation against him, that according to humane reason there was no way for him to
escape; notwithstanding being (as he says) counselled by a friend of his, at that instant, to
kill himself, it fell out well for him to opinionate himself yet in hope: for fortune,
beyond all mans discourse, did so turn and change that accident, that without any
inconvenience at all, he saw himself delivered: whereas on the contrary Brutus and
Cassius, by reason of the down-fall and rashnesse, wherewith before due time and
occasion they killed themselves; did utterly lose the reliques of the Roman liberty,
whereof they were protectors. The Lord of Anguien in the battle of Serisolles, as one
desperate of the combats success, which on his side went to wracke, attempted twice to
run himself through the throat with his rapier and thought by precipitation to bereave
himself of the enjoying of so notable a victory. I have seen a hundred Hares save
themselves even in the Grey-hounds jawes: Aliquis carnifici suo superstes fuit. (Sen.

Epist. xiii.) ’Some man has outlived his Hang-man.’
Multa dies variusque labor mutabilis evi
Rettulit in melius, multos alterna revisens
Lusit, et in solido rursus fortuna locavit. -- Virg. Æn. xi. 426.
Time, and of turning age the diverse strain,
Hath much to better brought, fortunes turn’d traine,
Hath many mock ’d, and set them fast again.
Plinie says there are but three sorts of sicknesses, which to avoid, a man may have some
colour of reason to kill himself. The sharpest of all is the stone in the bladder, when the
urine is there stopped. Seneca, those only, which for long time disturbe and distract the
offices of the mind. To avoid a worse death, some are of opinion, a man should take it at
his own pleasure. Democritus, chief of the Ætolians, being led captive to Rome, found
means to escape by night but being pursued by his keepers, rather, than he would be
taken again, ran himself through with his sword. Antinous and Theodotus, their City of
Epirus being by the Romans reduced unto great extremity, concluded, and persuaded all
the people to kill themselves. But the counsell, rather to yield, having prevailed, they went
to seek their own death, and rushed amidst the thickest of their enemies, with an
intention rather to strike than to ward themselves. The Iland of Gosa, being some years
since surprised and over-run by the Turkes, a certain Sicilian therein dwelling, having
two fair daughters ready to be marrried, killed them both with his own hands, together
with their mother, that came in to help them. That done, running out into the streets, with a
crossebow in one hand and a caliver in the other, at two shoots slew the two first Turks
that came next to his gates, then resolutely drawing his sword, ran furiously among them,
by whom he was suddenly hewen in peeces: Thus, did he save himself from slavish
bondage, having first delivered his own from it. The Jewish women, after they had
caused their children to be circumcised, to avoid the crueltie of Antiochus, did headlong
precipitate themselves and them unto death. I have heard it credibly reported that a
gentleman of good quality being prisoner in one of our Gaols, his parents advertized that
he should assuredly be condemned to avoid the infamie of so reproachfull a death,
appointed a priest to tell him that the best remedy was to recommend himself to such a
with such a saint, with such, and such a vow, and to continue eight dayes without taking
any sustenance, what faintnesse or weaknesse soever he should feel in himself. He
believed them, and so without thinking on it, was delivered out of life and danger.
Scribonia perswading Libo her nephew, to kill himself, rather than to await the stroke of
justice, told him that for a man to preserve his own life, to put it into the hands of such as
three or foure dayes after should come and seek it, was even to dispatch another man’s
business, and that it was no other than for one to serve his enemies to preserve his blood,
therewith to make food. We read in the Bible that Nicanor the persecutor of Gods law,
having sent his satellites to apprehend the good old man Rasi as for the honor of his
virtue, surnamed the father of the Jewes; when that good man saw no other means left

him, his gate being burned, and his enemies ready to lay hold on him, chose rather than to
fall into the hands of such villaines and be so basely abused against the honor of his
place, to dye nobly, and so smote himself with his own sword; but by reason of his
haste, having not thoroughly slain himself, he ran to throw himself down from an
high wall, amongst the throng of people, which making him roome, he fell right upon his
head. All which notwithstanding, perceiving life to remaine in him, he took heart again;
and getting up on his feet, all goared with blood and loaden with strokes, making way
through the prease, came to a craggy and down-steepy rock, where, unable to go any
further, by one of his wounds with both his hands pulled out his guts, and tearing and
breaking them cast them amongst such as pursued him, calling and attesting the
vengeance of God to light upon them. Of all violences committed against conscience, the
most in mine opinion to be avoided is that which is offered against the chastitie of women.
Forasmuch as there is naturally some corporall pleasure commixt with it, and therefore the
dissent cannot fully enough be joined thereunto; and it seems that force is in some sort
intermixed with some will. The ecclesiastical story has in especiall reverence sundry
such examples of devout persons who called for death to warrant them from the outrages
which some tyrants prepared against their religion and consciences. Pelagia and
Sophronia, both canonised, the first, together with her mother and sisters, to escape the
outrageous rapes of some soldiers, threw herself into a river; the other, to shun the
force of Maxentius, the Emperor, slew herself. It shall perhaps redound to our
honor in future ages, that a wise author of these dayes, and namely a Parisian,, does
labor to persuade the ladies of our times rather to hazard upon any resolution than to
embrace so horrible a counsell of such desperation. I am sorie that to put amongst his
discourses he knew not the good saying I learnt of a woman at Tholouse, who had passed
through the hands of some soldiers: ’God be praised,’ said she, ’that once in my life I have
had my belly full without sinne.’ Verify these cruelties are not worthy of the French
curtesie. And God be thanked, since this good advertisement, our air is infinitely purged
of them. Let it suffice that in doing it they say no, and take it, following the rule of Marot.
The historie is very full of such, who a thousand ways have changed lingering, toylsome
life with death. Lucius Aruntius killed himself, as he said to avoid what was past and
eschue what was to come. Granius Sylvanus and Statius Proximus, after they had been
pardoned by Nero, killed themselves, either because they scorned to live by the favor of
so wicked a man, or because they would not another time be in danger of a second pardon,
seeing his so easy-yielding unto suspicions and accusations against honest men.
Spargapises, son unto Queene Tomiris, prisoner by the law of war unto Cyrus,
employed the first favor that Cyrus did him by setting him free, to kill himself, as he
who never pretended to reap other fruit by his liberty, than to revenge the infamie of his
taking upon himself. Boges, a Governor for King Xerxes, in the country of Ionia, being
besieged by the Athenians army, under the conduct of Cymon, refused the composition to
return safely, together with his goods and treasure, into Asia, as one impatient to survive
the loss of what his master had given him in charge; and after he had stoutly, and even to
the last extremity, defended the town, having no manner of victuals left him; first he all
the gold and treasure, with whatsoever he imagined the enemy might reap any commoditie

by, into the river Strimon . Then having caused a great pile of wood to be set on fire, and
made all women, children, concubines and servants to be stripped and throwne into the
flames, afterward ran in himself, where all were burned. Ninachetuen, a lord in the East
Indies, having had an inkling of the King of Portugales viceroys deliberation to dispossess
him, without any apparent cause of the charge he had in Malaca, for to give it unto the
King of Campar, of himself took this resolution: First, he caused an high scaffold to be
set up, somewhat longer than broad, underpropped with pillars, all gorgeously hanged
with rich tapestrie, strewed with flowers and adorned with precious perfumes. Then,
having put on a sumptuous long robe of cloth of gold, richly beset with store of precious
stones of inestimable worth, he came out of the palace into the street, and by certain steps
ascended the scaffold, in one of the corners whereof was a pile of aromaticall wood set
afire. All the people of the citie were flocked together to see what the meaning of such
unaccustomed preparation might tend unto. Ninachetuen, with an undanted, bold, yet
seeming discontented countenance, declared the manifold obligations which the Portugal
nation was endebted unto him for, expostulated how faithfully and truly he had dealt in his
charge; that having so often witnessed, armed at all assayes for others, that his honor was
much dearer unto him than life, he was not to forsake the care of it for himself; that
fortune refusing him all means to oppose himself against the injurie intended against
him, his courage at the least willed him to remove the feeling thereof, and not become a
laughing stocke unto the people, and a triumph to men of less worth than himself, which
words, as he was speaking, he cast himself into the fire. Sextilia, the wife of Scaurus, and
Praxea, wife unto Labeo, to encourage their husbands to avoid the dangers which pressed
them, wherein they had no share (but in regard of the interest of their conjugal affection),
voluntarily engaged their life, in this extreme necessitie, to serve them as an example to
imitate and company to regard. What they performed for their husbands, Cocceius Nerva
acted for his countrie, and though less profitable, yet equall in true love. That famous
interpreter of the laws, abounding in riches, in reputation, in credit, and flourishing in
health about the Emperor, had no other cause to rid himself of life but the compassion
of the miserable estate, wherein he saw the Roman commonwealth. Nothing can be
added unto the daintinesse of the wifes death of Fulvius who was so inward with
Augustus. Augustus perceiving he had blabbed a certain secret of importance, which he
on trust had revealed unto him, one morning coming to visit him, he seemed to frowne
upon him for it; whereupon as guilty, he returneth home as one full of despaire, and in
piteous sort told his wife that sithence he was falne into such a mischief, he was resolved
to kill himself; she, as one no whit dismaied, replied unto him: ’Thou shall do but right,
since having so often exprienced the incontinence of my tongue, you hast not learnt to
beware of it, yet give me leave to kill my self first,’ and without more adoe ran herself
through with a sword. Vibius Virius despairing of his cities safetie, besieged by the
Romans, and mistrusting their mercy, in their Senates last consultation, after many
remonstrances employed to that end, concluded that the best and fairest way was to escape
fortune by their own hands. The very enemies should have them in more honor, and
Hanniball might perceive what faithfull friends he had forsaken. Enviting those that
should allow of his advice to come and take a good supper, which was prepared in his

house, where, after great cheere, they should drinke together whatsoever should be
presented unto him; a drinke that shall deliver our bodies from torments, free our mindes
from injuries, a nd release our eyes and ears from seeing and hearing so horrible
mischiefes, which the conquered must endure at the hands of most cruel and offended
conquerors. ’I have,’ quoth he, ’taken order that nen fit for that purpose shall be ready,
when we shall be expired, to cast us into a great burning pile of wood.’ Diverse approved
of his high resolution, but few did imitate the same. Seven and twentie Senators followed
him, who after they had attempted to stifle so irkesome and suppress so terror-moving a
thought, with quaffing and swelling of wine, they ended their repast by this deadly messe:
and enter-bracing one another, after they had in common deplored and bewailed their
countries misfortunes, some went home to their own house, othersome stayed there, to be
entombed with Vibius in his own fire, whose death was so long and lingering, forasmuch
as the vapor of the wine having possessed their veines, and slowed the effect and
operation of the poyson, that some lived an hour after they had seen their enemies enter
Capua, which they caried the next day after, and incurred the miseries and saw the
calamities which at so high a rate they had sought to eschue. Taurea Iubellius, another
citizen there, the Consull Fulvius returning from that shameful slaughter which he had
committed of 225 Senators, called him churlishly by his name, and having arrested him;
’Co;nmand, ’quoth he unto him, ’that I also be massacred after so many others, that so you
mayest brag to have murthered a much more valiant man than ever you were.’ Fulvius, as
one enraged, disdaining him; forasmuch as be had newly received letters from Rome
contrary to the inhumanitie of his execution, which inhibited him to proceed any further;
Iubellius, continuing his speech, said: ’Sithence my Countrie is taken, my friends
butchered, and having with my own hands slain my wife and children, as the only
meane to free them from the desolation of this ruine, I may not dye the death of my fellow
citizens, let us borrow the vengeance of this hateful life from virtue:’ And drawing a
blade he had hidden under his garments, therewith ran himself through, and falling on his
face, died at the Consuls feet. Alexander besieged a City in India, the inhabitants
whereof, perceiving themselves brought to a very narrow pinch, resolved obstinately to
deprive him of the pleasure he might get of his victory, and to gether with their City, in
despite of his humanitie set both the Town and themselves on a light fire, and so were all
consumed. A new kind of warring, where the enemies did all they could, and sought to
save them, they to loose themselves, and to be assured of their death, did all a man can
possibly effect to warrant his life. Astapa, a City in Spain, being very weake of wals and
other defences, to withstand the Romanes that besieged it; the inhabitants drew all their
riches and wealth into the market-place, whereof having made a heap, and on the top of it
placed their wives and children, and encompassed and covered the same with drie brush
wood that it might burne the easier, and having appointed fifty lusty young men of theirs
for the performance of their resolution, made a sally, where following their determined
vow, seeing they could not vanquish, suffered themselves to be slain every mothers
child. The fifty, after they had massacred every living soul remaining in the City, and
set fire to the heap joyfully leaped there-into, ending their generous liberty in a state rather
insensible than dolorous and reproachfull; showing their enemies that, if fortune had

been so pleased, they should as well have had the courage to bereave them of the victory
as they, had to yield it them both vain and hideous, indeed, and mortal to those who allured
by the glittering of the gold that moulten ran from out the flame, thicke and threefold
approching greedily unto it, were therein smothered and burned, the formost being unable
to give back, by reason of the throng that followed them. The Abideans, pressed by Philip,
resolved upon the very same, but being prevented, the King whose heart abhorred to see
the fool-rash precipitation of such an execution (having first seized upon and saved the
treasure and moveables, which they had diversly condemned to the flames and utter
spoyle) retiring all the Soldiers, granted them the full space of three dayes to make
themselves away, that so they might do it with more order and leisure; which three dayes
they replenished with blood and murther beyond all hostile cruelty: And which is strange,
there was no one person saved that had power upon himself. There are infinite examples
of such-like popular conclusions, which seem more violent by how much more the effect
of them is more universall. They are less than when severall. What discourse would not
do in each one, it does in all the vehemence of societie ravishing particular judgements.
Such as were condemned to dye in the time of Tiberius, and delaid their execution any
while, lost their goods, and could not be buried; but such as prevented the same, in killing
themselves, were solemnly enterred, and might at their pleasure bequeath such goods as
they had to whom they list. But a man does also sometimes desire death, in hope of a
greater good. ’I desire,’ says Saint Paul, ’to be out of this world, that I may be with Jesus
Christ: and who shal release me out of these bonds?’ Cleombrotus Ambraciota, having
read Platoes Pheadon, was so possessed with a desire and longing for an after-life, that
without other occasion or more adoe, he went and headlong cast himself into the sea.
Whereby it appeareth how improperly we call this voluntarie dissolution despaire; unto
which the violence of hope does often transport us, and as often a peacefull and setled
inclination of judgement. Iaques du Castell, Bishop o Soissons, in the voyage which Saint
Lewes undertook beyond the seas, seeing the King and all his army ready to return into
France, and leave the affairs of Religion imperfect, resolved with himself rather to go
to heaven; And having bidden his friends farewell, in the open view of all men, rushed
alone into the enemies troops, of whom he was forthwith hewen in pieces. In a certain
kingdome of these late-discovered Indies, upon a day of a solemn procession, in which
the idols they adore are publikely carried up and down upon a chariot of exceeding
greatness: besides that, there are many seen to cut and slice great mammocks of their
quick flesh to offer the said idols; there are numbers of others seen who, prostrating
themselves alongst the ground, endure very patiently to be mouldred and crushed to death
under the chariots wheels, thinking thereby to purchase after their death a veneration of
holinesse, of which they are not defrauded. The death of this Bishop, armed as we have
said, argueth more generositie and less sense: the heat of the combat ammusing one part
of it. Some common-wealths there are that have gone about to sway the justice and direct
the opportunity of voluntarie deaths. In our City of Marseille they were wont in former
ages ever to keep some poison in store, prepared and compounded with hemlocke, at the
Cities charge, for such as would upon any occasion shorten their days, having first
approved the reasons of their enterprise unto the six hundred Elders of the Town, which

was their Senate: For otherwise it was unlawfull for any body, except by the Magistrates
permission, and for very lawfully-urgent occasions, to lay violent hands upon himself.
The very same law was likewise used in other places. Sextus Pompeius, going into Asia,
passed through the Iland of Cea, belonging to Negropont; it fortuned while he abode
there (as one as one reporteth that was in his companie) that a woman of great authority,
having first yielded an accompt unto her Citizens and showed good reasons why she was
resolved to end her life, earnestly entreated Pompey to be an assistant at her at her death,
that so it might be esteemed more honorable, which he assented unto; and having long
time in vain sought, by virtue of his eloquence (wherein be was exceeding ready) and
force of persuasion, to alter her intent and remove her from her purpose, in the end
yielded to her request. She had lived foure score and ten years in a most happy state of
mind and body, but when lying on her bed, better adorned than before she was
accustomed to have it, and leaning on her elbow, thus she bespoke: ’The Gods, O Sextus
Pompeius, and rather those I forgoe than those I go unto, reward and appay you, for that
you hast vouchsafed to be both a counsellor of my life and a witness of my death. As for
my part, having hitherto ever tasted the favourable visage of fortune, for fear the desire
of living overlong should make me taste of her frownes, with an happy and successfull
end I will now depart, and set free the remainder of my soul, leaving behind me two
daughters of, mine, with a legion of grand-children and nephewes.’ That done, having
preached unto and exhorted all her people and kinsfolks to an unitie and peace, and
divided her goods amongst them, and recommended her household Gods unto her eldest
daughter, with an assuredly-staide hand she took the cup wherein the poyson was, and
having made her vows unto Mercurie, and prayers to conduct her unto some happy place
in the other world, roundly swallowed that mortal potion; which done, she intertained the
progresse of her behaviour, and as the parts of her body were one after another possessed
with the cold operation of that venom: until such time as she felt it work at the heart
and in her entrals, she called her daughter to do her the last office and close her eyes.
Plinie reporteth of a certain Hiperborean nation, wherein, by reason of the mild
temperature of the aire, the inhabitants thereof commonly never dye, but when they please
to make themselves away, and that being weary and tired with living they are accustomed
at the end of a long-long age, having first made merry and good cheare with their friends,
from the top of an high-steepy rocke appointed for that purpose, to cast themselves
headlong into the sea. Grieving-smart, and a worse death seem to me the most excusable
incitations.




Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER IV: TO-MORROW IS A NEW DAY.






CHAPTER IV: TO-MORROW IS A NEW DAY.
DO with some reason, as me seems, give pricke and praise unto
Jaques Amiot above all our French writers, not only for his natural
purity, and pure elegancie of the tongue, wherin he excelleth all others,
nor for his indefatigable constancy of so long and toilesome a labor,
nor for the unsearchable depth of his knowledge, having so
successfully-happy been able to explaine an Author so close and
thorny, and unfold a writer so mysterious and entangled (for let any man tell me what he
list, I have no skill of the Greeke, but I see thorowout al his translation a sense so closely-
joynted, and so pithily-continued, that either he has assuredly understood and inned the
very imagination, and the true conceit of the Author, or having through a long and
continuall conversion, lively planted in his mind a general Idea of that of Plutarke, he
has at least lent him nothing that dot h belye him, or misseeme him) but above all, I kon
him thanks that he has had the hap to chuse, and knowledge to cull-out so worthy a
work, and a book so fit to the purpose, therewith to make so unvaluable a present unto
his Countrie. We that are in the number of the ignorant had been utterly confounded, had

not his book raised us from out the dust of ignorance: God-a-mercy his endevours we
dare not both speak and write: Even Ladies are therewith able to confront Masters of arts:
It is our breviarie. If so good a man chance to live, I bequeath Xenophon unto him, to do
as much. It is an easier peece of work, and so much the more agreeing to his age.
Moreover I wot not how meseemeth, although he roundly and clearly disintangle himself
from hard passages,, that notwithstanding his stile is more close and nearer itself when it
is not laboured and wrested, and that it glideth smoothly at his pleasure. I was even now
reading of that place where Plutarke speaks of himself, that Rusticus being present at a
declamation of his in Rome, received a packet from the Emperor, which he temporized
to open until he had made an end: wherein (says he) all the assistants did singularly
commend the gravitie of the man. Verily, being on the instance of curiosity and on the
greedy and insatiate passion of news, which with such indiscreet impatience and
impatient indiscretion, induceth us to neglect all things f or to entertaine a new-come
guest, and forget all respect and countenance whersoover we be, suddenly to break up
such letters as are brought us; he had reason to commend the gravitie of Rusticus: to
which he might also have added the commendation of his civilitie and curtesie, for that be
would not interrupt the course of his declamation: But I make a question whether he might
be commended for his wisdom; for receiving unexpected letters, and especially from an
Emperor, it might very well have fortuned that this deferring to read them might have
caused some notable inconvenience. Recklesness is the vice contrary unto curiosity,
towards which I am naturally inclined, aud wherein I have seen many men, so extremely
plunged, that three or foure days after the receiving of letters which have been sent them,
they have been found in their pockets yet unopened. I never opened any, not only of such
as had been committed to my keeping, but of such as by any fortune came to my hands.
And I make a conscience standing neare some great person if mine eyes chance unawares
to steale some knowledge of any letters of importance that he readeth. Never was man
less inquisitive, or pryed less into other mens affairs than I. In our fathers time the
Lord of Boutieres was like to have lost Turin, forasmuch as being one night at supper in
very good company he deferred the reading of an advertisement which was delivered him
of the treasons that were practised and complotted against that City where he
commanded. And Plutarke himself has taught me that Julius Cæsar had escaped death, if
going to the Senate-house that day wherein he was murdered by the conspirators he had
read a memorial which was presented unto him. Who likewise reporteth the story of
Archias, the Tyrant of Thebes, how the night fore-going the execution of the enterprize
that Pelopidas had complotted to kill him, thereby to set his Countrie at liberty: another
Archias of Athens wrote him a letter wherein he particularly related unto him all that was
conspired and complotted against him; which letter being delivered him whilst he sate at
supper, he deferred the opening of it, pronouncing this by-word: ’To morrow is a new day,’
which afterward was turned to a Proverb in Greece. A wise man may, in mine opinion, for
the interest of others, as not unmannerly to breake companie like unto Rusticus, or not to
discontinue some other affaire of importance, remit and defer to understand such news as
are brought him; but for his own private interest or particular pleasure, namely, if he be a
man having public charge, if he regard his dinner so much that he will not break it off, or

his sleepe that he will not interrupt it: to do it, is inexcusable. And in former ages was the
Consulate-place in Rome, which they named the most honorable at the table, because it
was more free and more accessible for such as might casually come in, to entertaine him
that should be there placed. Witness, that though they were sitting at the board, they
neither omitted nor gave over the managing of other affairs and following of other
accidents. But when all is said, it is very hard, chiefely in humane actions, to prescribe so
exact rules by discourse of reason, that fortune do not sway, and keep her right in them.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER V: OF CONSCIENCE






CHAPTER V: OF CONSCIENCE
Y BROTHER the Lord of Brouze and myself, during the time of our
civill wars, travelling one day together, we fortuned to meet upon the
way with a Gentleman in outward semblance, of good demeanour: He
was of our contrary faction, but forasmuch as he counterfeited himself
otherwise, I knew it not. And the worst of these tumultuous intestine
broyles is, that the cards are so shuffled (your enemy being neither by
language nor by fashion, nor by any other apparent marke distinguished
from you; nay, which is more, brought up under the same laws and customs, and
breathing the same air) that it is a very hard matter to avoid confusion and shun disorder.
Which consideration made me not a little fearefull to meet with our troopes, especially
where I was not known, lest I should be urged to tell my name, and perhaps do worse. As
other times before it had befalne me; for, by such a chance, or rather mistaking, I fortuned
once to lose all my men and horses and hardly escaped myself: and amongst other my
losses and servants that were slain, the thing that most grieved me was the untimely and
miserable death of a young Italian Gentlemen whom I kept as my Page, and very carefully

brought up, with whom dyed as forward, as budding and as hopefull a youth as ever I saw.
But this man seemed fearfully dismaid, and at every encounter of horseman and passage
by, or through any Town that held for the King, I observed him to be so strangely
distracted that in the end I perceived and guessed they were but guilty alarums that his
conscience gave him. It seemed unto this seely man that all might apparently, both
through his blushing self-accusing countenance, and by the crosses he wore upon his
upper garments, read the secret intentions of his faint heart. Of such marvailous-working
power is the sting of conscience: which often induceth us to bewray, to accuse, and to
combat ourselves; and for want of other evidences she produces ourselves against our
selves.
Occultum quaetiens animo tortore flagellum. -- Juven Sat. xiii. 195.
Their mind, the tormentor of sinne,
Shaking an unseen whip within.
The story of Bessus the Paeonian is so common, that even children have it in their
mouths, who being found, fault withal, that in mirth he had beaten down a nest of young
Sparrowes and then killed them, answered, he had great reason to do it; forasmuch as
those young birds ceased not falsly to accuse him to have murthered his father, which
parricide was never suspected to have been committed by him, and until that day had
layen secret; but the revengeful furies of the conscience made the same partie to reveale
it, that by all right was to do penance for so hateful and unnaturall a murther. Hesiodus
corrects the saying of Plato, that punishment does commonly succeed the guilt, and
follow sinne at hand: for, he affirmeth, that it rather is borne at the instant and together
with sinne itself, and they are as twinnes borne at one birth together. ’Whosoever expects
punishment suffe reth the same, and whosoever deserveth it, he does expect it. Impietie
does invent, and iniquitie does frame torments against itself,’
Malum constilium consultori pessimum. -- Eras. Chil. i. cent. ii. ad. 14.
Bad counsell is worst for the counsellor that gives the counsell.
Even as the Waspe stingeth and offendeth others, but herself much more; for, in hurting
others, she loses her force and sting for ever.
-----itasque in vulnere ponunt. -- Virg. Georg. iv. 238.
They, while they others sting,
Death to themselves do bring.
The Cantharides have some part in them, which by a contrarietie of nature serveth as an

antidot or counter-poison against their poison: so likewise, as one taketh pleasure in vice,
there is a certain contrary displeasure engendred in the conscience, which by sundry
irksome and painfull imaginations, perplexeth and tormenteth us, both waking and asleep.
Quippe ubi se multi per somnia saepe loquentes,
Aut morbo delirantes protraxe ferantur,
Et celata diu in medium peccata delisse. --Lucr. v. 1168.
Many in dreames oft speaking, or unhealed,
In sicknesse raving have themselves revealed,
And brought to light their sinnes long time concealed.
Apollodorus dreamed he saw himself first flayed by the Scythians, and then boiled in a
pot, and that his own heart murmured, saying: ’I only have caused this mischief to light
upon you.’ Epicurus was wont to say, that no lurking hole can shroud the wicked, for they
can never assure themselves to be sufficiently hidden, sithence conscience is ever ready to
disclose them to themselves.
-------- prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur. -- Juven. Sat. xiii. 2.
This is the first revenge, no guilty mind
Is quitted, though itself be judge assign’d.
Which as it does fill us with fear and doubt, so does it store us with assurance and trust.
And I may boldly say that I have waded through many dangerous hazards with a more
untired pace, only in consideration of the secret knowledge I had of my own will, and
innocencie of my desseignes.
Conscia mens ut cuique sua est, ita concipit intra
Pectora pro facto spemque metumque suo. --Ovid. Fast. i. 485.
As each mans mind is guiltie, so does he
Inlie breed hope and fear, as his deeds be.
Of examples there are thousands: It shall suffice us to alleage three only, and all of one
man. Scipio being one day accused before the Roman people of an urgent and capital
accusation, in stead of excusing himself, or flattering the Judges; turning to them, he
said: ’It will well beseeme you to undertake to judge of his head, by whose means you
have authority to judge of all the world.’ The same man, another time, being vehemently
urged by a Tribune of the people, who charged him with sundry imputations, in lieu of
pleading or excusing his cause, gave him this sudden and short answer: ’Let us go (quoth

he), my good Citizens; let us forthwith go (I say) to give hartie thanks unto the Gods for
the victory, which even upon such a day as this is they gave me against the
Carthaginians.’ And therewith advancing himself to march before the people, all the
assembly, and even his accuser himself did undelayedly follow him towards the Temple.
After that, Petilius having been animated and stirred up by Cato to solicite and demand a
strict accompt of him, of the money he had managed, and which was committed to his
trust while he was in the Province of Antioch, Scipio, being come into the Senate-house
of purpose to answer for himself, pulling out the book of his accompts from under his
gowne, told them all that that book contained truly both the receipt and laying out
thereof; and being required to deliver the same unto a Clarke to register it, he refused to
do it, saying he would not do himself that wrong or indignitie; and thereupon with his
own hands, in presence of all the Senate, tore the book in peeces. I cannot apprehend or
believe that a guiltie-cauterized conscience could possibly dissemble or counterfet such
an undismayed assurance: His heart was naturally too great, and enured to overhigh
fortune (says Titus Livius) to know how to be a criminall offender, and stoopingly to
yield himself to the baseness to defend his innocencie. Torture and racking are dangerous
inventions, and seem rather to be trials of patience than Essayes of truth. And both he
that can, and he that cannot endure them, conceal the truth. For why shall pain or
smart rather compell me to confesse that which is so indeed than force me to tell that
which is not? And contrariwise, if he who has not done that whereof he is accused, is
sufficiently patient to endure those torments, why shall not he be able to tolerate them
who has done it, and is guilty indeed; so dear and worthy a reward as life being
proposed unto him? I am of opinion that the ground of this invention proceedeth from the
consideration of the power and facultie of the conscience. For, to the guilty, it seems to
give a kind of furtherance to the torture, to make him confesse his fault, and weakneth
and dismayeth him: and on the other part, it encourageth and strengthneth the innocent
against torture. To say truth, it is a meane full of uncertainty and danger. What would not
a man say, nay, what not do, to avoid so grievous paines and shun such torments?
Etiam innocentes cogit mentiri dolor. -- Sen. Prover.
Torment to lie sometimes will drive,
Ev’n the most innocent alive.
Whence it followeth that he whom the Judge has tortured, because he shall not dye an
innocent, he shall bring him to his death, both innocent and tortured. Many thousands
have thereby charged their heads with false confessions. Amongst which I may well place
Phylotas, considering the circumstances of the endictment that Alexander framed against
him, and the progresse of his torture. But so it is, that (as men say) it is the least evil
humane weaknesse could invent; though, in my conceit, very inhumanely, and there
withall most unprofitably. Many Nations less barbarous in that than the Greek or the
Roman, who terme them so, judge it a horrible and cruel thing to racke and torment a
man for a fault whereof you are yet in doubt. Is your ignorance long of him? What can he

do withall? Are not you unjust who because you will not put him to death without some
cause, you do worse than kill him? And that it is so, consi der but how often he rather
chuseth to dye guiltlesse than pass by this informat1on, much more painfull than the
punishment or torment; and who many times, by reason of the sharpnesse of it, preventeth,
furthereth, indeed, and executeth the punishment. I wot not whence I heard this story, but it
exactly has reference unto the conscience of our Justice. A countrie woman accused a
souldier before his General, being a most severe Justicer, that he, with violence, had
snatched from out her poore childrens hands, the small remainder of some pap or water-
gruell, which she had only left to sustain them, forasmuch as the Army had ravaged and
wasted all. The poore woman had neither witness nor proofe of it: it was but her indeed
his no; which the General perceiving, after he had summoned her to be well advised what
she spake, and that she should not accuse him wrongfully; for, if she spake an untruth,
she should then be culpable of his accusation: But she constantly persisting to charge
him, he forthwith, to discover the truth, and to be thoroughly resolved, caused the accused
Soldiers belly to be ripped, who was found faulty, and the poore woman to have said
true; whereupon she was discharged. A condemnation instructive to others.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER VI: OF EXERCISE OR PRACTICE






CHAPTER VI: OF EXERCISE OR PRACTICE
T IS a hard matter (although our conceit do willingly apply, itself
unto it) that Discourse and Instruction should sufficiently be powerful
to direc t us to action, and addresse us to performance, if, over and
besides that, we do not by experience exercise and frame our mind to
the traine whereunto we will range it: otherwise, when we shall be on
the point of the effects, it will doubtlesse find itself much engaged
and empeached. And that is the reason why amongst Philosophers, those that have willed
to attaine to some greater excellence, have not been content, at home and at rest, to
expect the rigors of fortune, for fear she should surprise them unexperienced and find
them novices, if she should chance to enter fight with them but have rather gone to meet
and front her before, and witting-earnestly cast themselves to the trial of the hardest
difficulties. Some have thereby voluntarily forsaken great riches, only to practise a
voluntarie povertie; others have willingly found out labor, and an austeritie of a
toylesome life thereby to harden and enure themselves to evil and travell; othersome have
frankly deprived themselves of the dearest and best parts of their body, as of their eyes

and members of generation, lest their overpleasing and too-too wanton service might in
any sort mollifie and distract the constant resolution of their mind. But to dye, which is
the greatest work we have to do, exercise can nothing avail us thereunto. A man may,
by custom aud experience, fortifie himself against grief, sorrow, shame, want, and such
like accidents; but concerning death, we can but once feel and trie the same. We are all
novices, and new to learne when we come unto it. There have, in former times, been
found men so good husbands and thrifty of time, that even in death they have assayed to
taste and savor it; and bent their mind to observe and see what manner of thing that
passage of death was; but none did ever yet come backe again to tell us tidings of it..
-------- nemo expergitus extat
Frigida quem semel est vita i pausa sequuta. --Lucr. iii. 973.
No man does ever-after wake,
Whom once his lifes cold rest does take.
Canius Iulius, a noble Roman, a man of singular virtue and constancy, having been
condemned to death by that lewdly-mischievous monster of men, Caligula: besides many
marvelous evident assurances he gave of his matchlesse resolution, when he was even in
the nicke to endure the last stroke of the executioner; a Philosopher, being his friend,
interrupted him with this question, saying: ’Canius, in what state is your soul now? what
does she? what thoughts possesse you now? ’I thought,’ answered he, to keep me ready
and prepared with all my force, to see whether in this instant of death, so short and so
near at hand, I might perceive some dislodging or distraction of the soul, and whether it
will show some feeling of her sudden departure; that (if I apprehend or learne any thing of
her) I may afterward, if I can, return and give advertisement thereof unto my friends.’
See-here a Philosopher, not only until death, but even in death itself: what assurance
was it, and what fiercenes of courage, to will that his own death should serve him as a
lesson, and have leisure to think else where in a matter of such consequence;
-------- jus hoc animi morientis habebat. --Lucan. viii. 636.
This power of mind had he,
When it from him did flee.
Me seems, nevertheless, that in some sort there is a meane to familiarize ourselves
with it, and to assay it. We may have some experience of it, if not whole and perfect, at
least such as may not altogether be unprofitable, and which may yield us better fortified
and more assured. If we cannot attaine unto it, we may at least approch it, and discerne the
same: And if we cannot enter her fort, yet shal we see and frequent the approches unto it.
It is not without reason we are taught to take notice of our sleepe for the resemblance it
has with death. How easily we pass from wakmg to sleeping; with how little interest we

lose the knowledge of light and of ourselves. The facultie of sleepe might perhaps seem
unprofitable and against nature, sithence it depriveth up of all actions and barreth us of all
sense, were it not that nature does thereby instruct us that she has equally made us as well
to live as to die; and by life presenteth the eternal state unto us which she after the same
reserveth for us, so to accustome us thereunto, and remove the fear of it from us. But
such as by some violent accident are falne into a faintness of heart, and have lost all senses,
they, in mine opinion, have well-nigh been where they might behold her true and natural
visage: For, touching the instant or moment of the passage, it is not to be feared it should
bring any traveil or displeasure with it, forasmuch as we can have nor sense nor feeling
without pleasure. Our sufferances have need of time, which is so short, and plunged in
death, that necessarily it must be insensible. It is the approches that lead unto it we should
fear; and those may fall within the compasse of mans experience. Many things seem
greater by imagination than by effect. I have passed over a good part of my age in sound
and perfect health. I say not only sound but blithe and wantonly lustfull. That state full of
lust, of prime and mirth, made me deem the consideration of sicknesses so yrkesome and
horrible, that when I came to the experience of them I have found their fits but weake, and
their assaults but faint, in respect of my apprehended fear. See here what I daily prove.
Let me be under a roofe, in a good chamber, warme-clad, and well at ease, in some
tempestuous and stormy night. I am exceedingly perplexed and much grieved for such as
are abroad and have no shelter: But let me be in the storme my self, I do not so much as
desire to be else-where: Only to be continually pent up in a chamber seemed intolerable to
me. I have now enured my self to live a whole weeke, indeed a moneth in my chamber, full
of care, trouble, alteration, and weaknesse; and have found that in the time of my best
health I moaned such as were sicke much more than I can well moan my self when I am
ill at ease: and that the power of my apprehension did well-nigh halfe endeare the essence
and truth of the thing itself. I am in good hope the like will happen to me of death: and
that it is not worth the labor I take for so many preparations as I prepare against her; and
so many helpes as I call to sustain, and assemble to endure the shocke and violence of it.
But hab or nab we can never take too much advantage of it. During our second or third
troubles (I do not well remember which) I fortuned one day, for recreation sake, to go
forth and take the air, about a league from my house, who am seated even in the bowels
of all troubles of our civill wars of France, supposing to be most safe, so near mine
own home and retreite, that I had no need of better attendance or equipage. I was
mounted upon a very easy-going nag, but not very sure. At my returning home again, a
sudden occasion being offered me to make use of this nag in a peece of service whereto he
was neither trained nor accustomed, one of my men (a strong sturdy fellow), mounted
upon a young strongheaded horse, and that a desperate hard mouth, fresh, lusty and in
breath, to show his courage, and to outgoe his fellowes, fortuned with might and main to
set spurrs unto him, and giving him the bridle, to come right into the path where I was,
and as a Colossus with his weight riding over me and my nag, that were both very little,
he overthrew us both, and made us fall with our heels upward: so that the nag lay along
astonied in one place, and I in a trance groveling on the ground ten or twelve paces wide
of him: my face all torn and brused, my sword which I had in my hand a good way from

me, my girdle broken, with no more motion or sense in me than a stocke. It is the only
swooning that ever I felt yet. Those that were with, me, after they had assayed all possible
means to bring me to my self again, supposing me dead, took me in their arms, and
with much adoe were carrying me home to my house, which was about halfe a French
league thence: upon the way, and after I had for two hours space by all been supposed
dead and past all recoverie, I began to stir and breathe: for so great aboundance of blood
was falne into my stomake, that to discharge it nature was foreed to rowse up her spirits. I
was immediately set upon my feet, and bending forward, I presently cast up in quantitie as
much clottie pure blood as a bucket will hold and by the way was constrained to do the
like diverse times before I could get home, whereby, I began to recover a little life, but it
was by little and little, and so long adoing, that my chief senses were much more
enclining to death than to life.
Perche dubbiosa ancor del suo ritorno
Non s’assicura attonita la mente.
For yet the mind doubtfull of it’s return
Is not assured, but astonished.
The remembrance whereof (which yet I bear deepely imprinted in my mind)
representing me her visage and Idea so lively and so naturally, does in some sort reconcile
me unto her. And when I began to see, it was with so dim, so weake and so troubled a
sight, that I could not discerne anything of the light,
-------- come quel ch’or apre, or chiude
Gli occhi, mezzo tra l’ sonno e l’esser desto.
As he that sometimes opens, sometimes shuts
His eyes, betweene sleepe and awake.
Touching the functions of the soul, they started up and came in the same progresse as
those of the body. I perceived my self all bloudy; for my doublet was all sullied with the
blood I had cast. The first conceit I apprehended was that I had received some shot in my
head; and in truth, at the same instant, there were diverse that shot round about us. Me
thought my self had no other hold of me but of my lips-ends. I closed mine eyes to help
(as me seemed) to send it forth, and took a kind of pleasure to linger and languishingly
to let my self go from my self. It was an imagination swimming superficially in my
mind, as weake and as tender as all the rest: but in truth, not only exempted from
displeasure but rather commixt with that pleasant sweetesse which they feel that suffer
themselves to fall into a soft-slumbring and sense-entrancing sleepe. I believe it is the
same state they find themselves in, whom in the agony of death we see to droop and faint
through weaknesse: and am of opinion we plaine and moan them without cause,

esteeming that either they are agitated with grievous pangs, or that their soul is pressed
with painfull cogitations. It was ever my conceit against the opinion of many, indeed
against that of Stephanus la Boetie, that those whom we see so overwhelmed and faintly-
drooping at the approches of their end, or utterly cast down with the lingring
tediousnesse of their deseases, or by accident of some apoplexie or falling-evil,
----- (vi morbi sæpe coactus
Ante oculos aliquis nostros ut fulminis ictu,
Concidit, et spumas agit, ingemit, et fremit artus,
Desipit exentant nervos torquetur, anhelat,
Inconstanter et in jactando membra fatigat), -- Lucr. iii. 490.
(Some man by force of sicknesse drivn does fall,
As if by thunder stroke, before our eyes;
He fomes, he grones, he trembles over all,
He raves, he stretches, he’s vext, panting lyes,
He tyr’s his limbs by tossing,
Now this now that way crossing,)
or hurt in the head, whom we hear throb and rattle, and send forth grones and gaspes,
although we gather some tokens from them, whereby it seems they have yet some
knowledge left and certain motions we see them make with their body: I say, I have ever
thought they had their soul and body buried and asleepe.
Vivat et est vitæ nescius ipse suæ. -- Ovid. Trist. i. El. iii. 12.
He lives yet knowes not he,
That he alive should be.
And I could not believe that at so great an astonishment of members and deffailance of
senses the soul could maintaine any force within, to know herself; and therefore had no
manner of discourse tormenting them, which might make them judge and feel the misery
of their condition, and that consequently they were not greatly to be moaned. As for my
self, I imagine no state so intolerable nor condition so horrible, as to have a feelingly-
afflicted soul, void of means to disburthen and declare herself: As I would say of those
we send to execution, having first caused their tongue to be cut out, were it not that in this
manner of death the most dumbe seems unto me the fittest, namely, if it be accompanied
with a resolute and grave countenance. And as those miserable prisoners which light in the
hands of those hard-harted and villenous Soldiers of these times, of whom they are
tormented with all manner of cruel entreaty, by compulsion to drawe them unto some
excessive and unpossible ransoms, keeping them al that while in so hard a condition and
place, that they have no way left them to utter their thoughts and express their misery.

The Poets have feigned there were some Gods that favoured the release of such as suffered
so languishing deaths.
-----hunc ego Diti
Sacrum jussa fero, teque isto corpore solvo.-- Virg. Æn. iv. 703, Iris.
This to death sacred, I, as was my charge,
Doe bear, and from this body you enlarge.
And the faltering speeches and uncertaine answers, that by continuall ringing in their
ears and incessant urging them, are sometimes by force wrested from them, or by the
motions which seem to have some sympathy with that whereof they are examined, is
notwithstanding no witnes that they live at least a perfect sound life. We do also in
yawning, before sleep fully seize upon us, apprehend as it were in a slumber, what is done
about us, and with a troubled and uncertains hearing, follow the voyces, which seem to
sound but on the outward limits of our soul; and frame answers according to the last
words we heard, which taste more of chance than of sense: which thing now I have proved
by experience, I make no doubt but hitherto I have well judged of it. For, first lying as in a
trance, I laboured even with my nailes to open my doublet (for I was unarmed), and well I
wot that in my imagination I felt nothing did hurt me. For, there are several motions in us
which proceed not of our free wil.
Semianimesque micant digiti, ferrumque retractant. -- x. 396.
The halfe-dead fingers stir, and feel,
(Though it they cannot stir) for steele.
Those that fall, do commonly by a natural impulsion cast their arms abroad before
their falling, which sheweth that our members have certain offices, which they lend one
to another, and possesse certain agitations, apart from our discourse:
Falciferos memorant currus abscindere membra,
Ut tremere in terra videatur ab artubus, id quod
Decidit abscissum, cum mens tamen atque hominis vis
Mobilitate mali non quit sentire dolorem. -- Lucr. iii. 648.
They say, sith-bearing chariots limbes bereave,
So as on earth, that which cut-off they leave,
Does seem to quake; when yet mans force and mind
Does not the pain, through so quick motion, find.
My stomacke was surcharged with clotted blood, my hands of themselves were still

running to it, as often they are wont (indeed against the knowledge of our will) where we
feel it to itch. There are many creatures, indeed some men, in whom after they are dead
we may see their muskles to close and stir. All men know by experience, there be some
parts of our bodies which often without any consent of ours do stir, stand, and lie
down again. Now these passions, which but exteriourly touch us, cannot properly be
termed ours; for, to make them ours, a man must wholy be engaged unto them: And the
paities that our feet or hands feel whilst we sleepe are not ours. When I came near my
house, where the tidings of my fall was already come, and those of my household met me,
with such outcries as are used in like times, I did not only answer some words to what I
was demanded, but some tell me I had the memory to command my men to give my wife
a horse, whom I perceived to be overtired, and labouring in the way, which is very hilly,
foul, and rugged. It seems this consideration proceeded from a vigilant soul: yet was I
cleane distracted from it, they were but vain conceits, and as in a cloud, were only moved
by the senses of the eyes and ears: they came not from my self. All which not
withstanding, I knew neither whence I came nor whither I went, nor could I understand or
consider what was spoken unto me. They were but light effects, that my senses produced
of themselves, as it were of custom. Whatsoever the soul did assist it with was but a
dreame, being lightly touched, and only sprinkled by the soft impression of the sense. In
the meane time my state was verily most pleasant and easefull. I felt no manner of care or
affliction, neither for my self nor others. It was a slumbering, languishing and extreme
weaknesse, without any pain at all. I saw my own house and knew it not; when I was
laid in my bed, I felt great ease in my rest, For I had been vilely hurried and hauled by
those poore men, which had taken the paines to carry me upon their arms a long and
wearysome way, and to say truth, they had all been wearied twice or thrice over, and
were faine to shift severall times. Many remedies were presently offered me, but I took
none, supposing verily I had been deadly hurt in the head. To say truth, it had been a
very happy death: For, the weaknesse of my discourse hindered me from judging of it, and
the feeblenesse of my body from feeling the same. Me thought I was yielding up the ghost
so gently, and after so easy and indolent a manner, that I feel no other action less
burthensome than that was. But when I began to come to life again and recover my
former strength,
Vt tandem sensus convaluere mei. -- Ovid. Trist. i. El. iii. 14.
At last when all the sprites I bear,
Recalled aild recollected were,
which was within two or three hours after, I presently felt my self full of aches and
paines all my body over; for, each part thereof was with the violence of the fall much
brused and tainted; and for two or three nights after I found my self so ill, that I verily
supposed I shold have had another fit of death: But that a more lively, and sensible one:
(and to speak plaine) I feel my bruses yet, and fear me shall do while I live: I will not
forget to tell you, that the last thing I could rightly fall into again was the remembrance

of this accident, and I made my men many times to repeat me over and over again,
whither I was going, whence I came, and what hour that chance befell me, before I could
throughly conceive it. Concerning the manner of my falling, they in favor of him who
had been the cause of it, concealed the truth from me, and told me other flim flam tales.
But a while after and the morrow next, when my memory began to come to itself again,
and represent the state unto me wherein I was at the instant, when I perceived the horse
riding over me (for being at my heels, I chanced to espy him and held my self for dead:
yet was the conceit so sudden that fear had no leisure to enter my thoughts) me seemed it
was a flashing or lightning that smote my soul with shaking, and that I came from
another world. This discourse of so slight an accident is but vain and frivolous were not
the instructions I have drawne from thence for my use: For truly, for a man to acquaint
himself with death, I find no better way than to approach unto it. Now, as Plinie says,
every man is a good discipline unto himself, alwayes provided he be able to prie into
himself. This is not my doctrine, it is but my study and not another man’s lesson, but
my own: Yet ought no man to blame me if I impart the same. What serves my turn
may perhaps serve another mans: otherwise I marre nothing; what I make use of is mine
own. And if I play the foole, it is at my own cost, and without any other bodies
interest, For it is but a kind of folly that dies in me, and has no traine. We have notice but
of two or three former ancients that have trodden this path; yet can we not say, whether
altogether like unto this of mine, for we know but their names. No man since has
followed their steps; it is a thorny and crabbed enterprise, and more than it makes show of,
to follow so strange and vagabond a path as that of our spirit: to penetrate the shady, and
enter the thicke-covered depths of these infernall winding crankes; to chuse so many and
settle so severall aires of his agitatations: And tis a new extraordinary ammusing that
distracts us from the common occupation of the world, indeed, and from the most
recommended: Many years are past since I have no other aime whereto my thoughts
bend, but my self, and that I controule and study nothing but my self. And if I study
anything else, it is immediately to place it upon, or to say better in myself. And methinks
I err not, as commonly men do in other sciences, without all comparison less profitable. I
impart what I have content not my self therein. ’There is no description so hard, nor so
profitable, as is the description of a man own life.’ Yet must a man handsomely trimme-
up, indeed dispose and range himself to appeare on the Theatre of this world. Now I
continually tricke up my self; for I uncessantly describe my self. Custome has made a
mans speech of himself vicious, and obstinately forbids it in hatred of boasting, which
ever seems closely to follow one’s self witnesses. Whereas a man should wipe the
childs nose, that is now called to unnose himself.
In vicium ducit culpæ fuga. -- Hor. Art. Poet. 31.
Some shunning of some sinne,
Doe draw some further in.
I find more evil than good by this remedy: But suppose it were true, that for a man to

entertaine the company with talking of himself were necessarily presumption, I ought not,
following my general intent, to refuse an action that publisheth this crazed quality, since I
have it in my seIfe: and I should not conceal this fault, which I have not only in use but in
profession. Nevertheless, to speak my opinion of it, this custom to condemne wine is
much to blame, because many are there with made drunke. Only good things may be
abused. And I believe this rule has only regard to popular defects: They are snares
wherewith neither Saints, nor Philosophers, nor Divines, whom we hear so gloriously to
speak of themselves, will in any sort be bridled. No more do I, though I be no more the
one than the other. If they write purposely or directly of it, yet when occasion does
conveniently lead them unto it, faine they not head long to cast themselves into the lists?
Whereof does Socrates treat more at large than of himself? To what does he more often
direct his disciples discourses, than to speak of themselves, not for their bookes lesson,
but of the essence and moving of their soul? We religiously shrive ourselves to God and
our Confessor, as our neighbors to all the people. But will some answer me, we report
but accusation; we then report all: For even our virtue itself is faulty and repentable. My
art and profession is to live. Who forbids me to speak of it according to my sense,
experience, and custom; let him appoint the Architect to speak of buildings, not
according to himself, but his neighbors according to anothers skill, and not his own. If
it be a glory for a man to publish his own worth himself, why does not Cicero prefer the
eloquence of Hortensius, and Hortensius that of Cicero? Some may perhaps suppose
that by deeds and effects, and not simply by words, I witness of my self. I principally
set forth my cogitations; a shapelesse subject, and which cannot fall within the compasse
of a workemanlike production; with much adoe can I set it down in this ayrie body of the
voice. Wiser men, and more learned and devout, have lived avoiding all apparent effects.
Effects would speak more of fortune than of me. They witness their part and not mine,
unless it be conjecturally and unc ertainly: parcels of a particular show. I wholy set forth
and expose my self: It is a Sceletos; where at first sight appeare all the vaines, muskles,
gristles, sinnewes and tendons, each severall part in his due place. The effect of the cough
produces, one part, that of palenesse or panting of the heart another, and that doubtfully. I
write not my gests, but my self and my essence. I am of opinion that a man must be very
wise to esteeme himself, and equally consciencious to give test imony of it: be it low, be
it high indifferently. If I did absolutely seem good and wise unto my self, I would
boldly declare it. To speak less of himself than he possesseth, is folly, and not
modesty. To say himself for less than he is worth is basenesse and pusilanimity, says
Aristotle. No virtue aids itself with false- hood, and truth is never a matter of error. And
yet for a man to say more of himself than he can well prove, is not ever presumption
though often sottishnesse. For a man to over-weene and please himself exceedingly with
what he is, and fall into indiscreet love with himself, is in my conceit the substance of
this vice. The best remedy to cure him, is to do cleane contrary to that which those
appoint, who in forbidding men to speak of themselves, do consequentiy also inhibit more
to think of themselves. Pride consisteth in conceit. The tongue can have no great share in
it. For one to ammuse on himself is i n their imagination to please himself: And for a
man to frequent and practise himself, is at an over-dear rate to please himself. But this

excess does only breed in them, that but superficially feel and search themselves that are
seen to follow their affairs, which call idleness and fondnesse for a man to entertaine, to
applaud, and to endeare himself, and frame Chimeræs or build Castles in the air,
deeming themselves as a third person and strangers to themselves. If any be besotted with
his own knowledge looking upon himself, let him cast his eyes towards former ages, his
pride shall be abated, his ambition shall be quailed; for there shall he find many thousands
of spirits that will cleane suppress and tread him under. If he fortune to enter any self-
presumption of his own worth, let him but call to remembrance the lives of Scipio and
Epaminondas; so many armies, and so many Nations which leave him so far behind them.
No particular quality shall make him proud, that therewith shall reckon so many imperfect
and weak qualities that in him and at last the nullity of the human condition. Forasmuch as
Socrates had truly only nibled on the precept of his God to know himself, and had learned
to contemne himself, he alone was esteemed worthy of the name of Wise. Whosoever
shall so know himself let him boldly make himself known by his own mouth.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER VII: OF THE RECOMPENSES OR REWARDS OF HONOUR.






CHAPTER VII: OF THE RECOMPENSES OR REWARDS OF HONOUR.
HOSE which write the life of Augustas Cæsar note this in his military
discipline, that he was exceeding liberal and lavish in his gifts to such
as were of any desert; but as sparing and strait-handed in meere
recompences of honor. Yet so it is that himself had been liberally
gratified by his Unkle with militarie rewards, before ever he went to
wars. It has been a witty invention, and received in most parts of
the worlds Common-wealths, to establish and ordaine certain vain
and worthles markes, therewith to honor and recompence virtue: As are the wreathes of
Lawrell, the Chaplets of Oake, and the Garlands of Myrtle, the form of a certain
peculiar garment; the privilege to ride in Coach through the City; or by night to have a
Torch carried before one: Some particular place to sit in in common assemblies; the
prerogatives of certain surnames and titles, and proper additions in arms, and such like
things; the, use whereof has been diversly received according to the opinion of nations
which continueth to this day. We have for our part, together with diverse of our neighbour-
nations, the orders of knighthood, which only were established to this purpose. Verily it is

a most laudable use and profitable custom, to find means to reward the worth and
acknowledge the valor of rare and excellent men, to satisfie and content them with such
payments as in no sort charge the commonwealth, and put the prince to no cost at all. And
that which was ever known by ancient experience, and at other times we have plainly
perceived amongst ourselves, that men of quality were ever more jealous of such
recompences than of others wherein was both gain and profit, which was not without
reason and great apparence. If to the prize, which ought simply to be of honor, there be
other commodities and riches joined, this kind of commixing, instead of encreasing the
estimation thereof, does empaire, dissipate, and abridge it. The order of the Knights of
Saint Michæl in France, which of so long continuance has been in credit amongst as,
had no greater commoditie than that it had no manner of communication with any other
advantage or profit, which has heretofore been the cause that there was no charge or
state of what quality soever, whereto the nobility pretended with so much desire, or
aspired with more affection, as it did to obtaine that order; nor calling that was followed
with more respect or greatness. Vertue embracing with more ambition, and more
willingly aspiring after a recom pense, that is meerely and simply her own, and which is
rather glorious than profitable. For, to say truth, other gifts have no use so worthy,
inasmuch as they are employed to all manner of occasions. With riches a man does reward
the service of a groom, the diligence of a messenger, the hopping of a dancer, the tricks
of a vaulter, the breath of a lawyer, and the basest offices a man may receive; indeed, with the
same paultry pelfe mony, vice is payed and sin requited, as flattery, murther, treason ,
Maquerelage, and what not? It is then no marvel, if virtue does less willingly desire this
kind of common trash, mony, than that which is only proper and peculiar to herself, and
is altogether noble and generous. Augustus had therefore reason to be much more
niggardly amd sparing of this last than of the former, forasmuch as honor is a privilege
that draws his preincipall essence from rareness; and so does verture itself.
Cui malus est nemo, quis bonus esse potest? -- MART. xii. Epig. lxxxii
To him who good can seem,
Who does none bad esteeme?
We shall not see a man highly regarded, or extraordinarily commended, that is curiously
careful to have his children well nurtured, because it is a common action, how just and
worthy praise soever it be, no more than one great tree, where the forrest is full of such. I
do not think that any Spartane Citizen did boastingly glorifie himself for his valor,
because it was a popular virtue in that nation, and as, little for his fidelity and contempt of
riches. There is no recompence falls unto virtue, how great soever it be, if it once have
past into custom; and I wot not whether we might call it great, being common. Since then
the rewards of honor have no other prise and estimation than that few enjoy it, there is no
way to disannul them but to make a largesse of them. Were there now more men found
deserving the same than in former ages, yet should not the reputation of it be corrupted.
And it may easily happen that more deserve it, for there is no virtue does so easily spread

itself as military valiancie. There is another true, perfect, and philosophicall, whereof I
speak not (I use this word according to our custom), far greater and more full than
this,, which is a force and assurance of the soul, equally contemning all manner of
contrary accidents, upright, uniform, and constant, whereof ours is but an easy and
glimmering raie. Custome, institution, example and fashion, may effect what ever they list
in the establishing of that I speak of, and easily make it vulgare, as may plainely be seen
by the experience our civill wars give us of it. And whosoever could now join us
together, and eagerly flesh all our people to a common enterprise, we should make our
ancient military name and chivalrous credit to flourish again. It is most certain that the
recompense of our order did not in former times only concerne prowis and respect valor;
it had a further aime. It was never the reward or payment of a valiant souldier, but of a
famous Captain. The skill to obey could not deserve so honorable an hire; for, cast we
back our eyes to antiquity, we shall perceive that for the worthy obtaining thereof, there
was required more universal warrelike expertnesse, and which might embrace the greatest
part, and most parts of a military man. Neque enim eædem militares et imperatoriæ artes
sunt, ’For the same arts and parts belong not to a general and common Souldier;’ and
who besides that should also be of a fit and accommodable condition for such a dignitie.
But I say, that if more men should now adayes be found worthy of it than have been
heretofore, yet should not ounr princes be more liberall of it, and it had been much better
not to bestow it upon all them to whom it was due, than for ever to lose, as of late we have
done, the use of so profitable an invention. No man of courage vouchsafeth to advantage
himself of that which is common unto many. And those which in our dayes be least
merited that honorable recompence, seem, in all apparence, most to disdaine it, by that
means place themselves in the rank of those to whom the wrong is offered by unworthy
bestowing and vilifying of that badge which particularly was due unto them. Now by
defacing and abolishing this to suppose, suddenly to be able to bring into credit and renew
a semblable custom, is no convenient enterprise in so licentious, so corruptedi and so
declining age, as is this wherein we now live. And it will come to pass that the last shall
even from her birth incur the incommodities which have lately ruined and overthrowne the
other. The rules of this new orders dispensation had need to be otherwise wrested and
constrained for to give it authority, and this tumultuous season is not capable of a short
and ordered bridle. Besides, before a man is able to give credit unto it, it is requisite a man
lose the memory of the first, and of the contempt whereinto it is fallen. This place might
admit some discourse upon the consideration of valor, and difference betweene this
virtue and others. But Plutarch having often spoken of this matter, it were in vain here
for me to repeat what he says of it. This is worthy to be considered, that our nation gives
the chief preheminence of all virtue unto valiancie, as the etymology of the word
sheweth, which cometh of valor or worth; and that according to our received custom,
when after the phrase of our court and nobility we speak of a worthy man, or of an honest
man, we thereby inferre no other thing than a valiant man; after the usual Roman fashion.
For the general denomination of virtue does amongst them take her etymology of force or
might. The only proper and essentiall form of our nobility in France is military vocation.
It is very likely that the first virtue that ever appeared amongst men, and which to some

has given preheminence over others, has been this by which the strongest and most
courageous have become masters over the weakest, and purchased a particular rank and
reputation to themselves. Whereby this honor and dignity of speech is left unto it: or else
these nations, being very warlike, have given the price unto that of vertues, which was the
worthiest and more familiar unto them. Even as our pa ssion, and this heart-panting and
mind-vexing careful diligence, and diligent carefulnesse, which we continually apprehend
about woman’s chastity, causeth also that a good woman, an honest woman, a woman of
honor and virtue, does in effect and substance signifle no other thing unto us than a
chaste wife or woman; as if to bind them to this duty, we did neglect all others, and give
them free liberty to commit any other fault, to covenant with them never to quit or forsake
this duty.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER VIII: OF THE AFFECTIONS OF FATHERS TO THEIR CHILDREN. TO THE
LADY OF ESTISSAC






CHAPTER VIII: OF THE AFFECTIONS OF FATHERS TO THEIR CHILDREN.
TO THE LADY OF ESTISSAC
ADAME, if strangenesse do not save or novelty shield me, which are
wont to give things reputation, I shall never, with honesty, quit myself
of this enterprise yet is it so fantastic and bears a show so differient
from common custom, that that may perhaps purchase it free passage. It
is a melancholy humor, and consequently a hateful enemy to my
natural complexion, bred by the anxietie and produced by the anguish
of carking care, whereinto some years since I cast myself, that first put
this humorous conceipt of writing into my head. And finding myself afterward wholy
unprovided of subject, and void of other matter, I have presented myself unto myself for
a subject to write and argument to descant upon. It is the only book in the world of this
kind, and of a wild extravagant designe. Moreover, there is nothing in it worthy the
marking but this fantasticalnesse. For, to so vain a ground and base a subject, the worlds

best workman could never have given a fashion deserving to be accompted of. Not
(worthy Lady) sithence I must portray my self to the life, I should have forgotten a part
of importance, if therewithall I had not represented the honor I have ever yielded to your
deserts, which I have especially been willing to declare in the forefront of this chapter;
Forasmuch as amongst your other good parts and commendable qualities, that of loving
amity, which you have shewen to your children, holdeth one of the first rankes.
Whosoever shall understand and know the age, wherein your late husband the Lord of
Estissac left you a Widdow, the great, and honorable matches have been offered you (as
worthy and as many as to any other Lady in France of your condition) the constant
resolution, and resolute constancy, wherewith so many years you have sustained, and
even in spight or athwart so manifold thorny difficulties, the charge and conduct of their
affairs, which have tossed, turmoyled and removed you in all comers of France, and still
hold you besieged; the happy and successfull forwardnes you, which only through your
wisdom or good fortune have given them, he will easily say with me, that in our age we
have no patterne of motherly affecttion more exemplarie than yours. I praise God
(Madame) it hathe been so well employed : For, the good hopes, which the young Lord
of Estissac, your son, gives of himself, fore-show he shall come to an undoubted
assurance that when he shall come to years of discretion, you shall reape the obedience
of a noble, and find the acknowledgement of a good child. But because, by reason of his
child-hood, he could not take notice of the exceeding kindness and many-fold offices he
has received from you, my meaning is, that if ever these my compositions shall perhaps one
day come into his hands (when perhaps I shall neither have mouth nor speech to
declare it unto him), he receive this testimony in all veritie from me; which shall also
more lively be testified unto him by the good effects, (whereof, if so it please God, be
shall have a sensible feeling) that there is no Gentleman in France more endebted to his
mother than he; and that hereafter he cannot yield a more certain proofe of his goodnes,
and testimony of his virtue, than in acknowledging and confessing you for such. If there
be any truly-natural law, that is to say, any instinct, universally and perpetually imprinted,
both in beasts and us, (which is not without controversie) I may, according to mine
opinion, say, that next to the care which each living creature has to his preservation, and
to flie what does hurt him, the affection which the engenderer beareth his off-spring holds
the second place in this rank. And forasmuch as nature seems to have recommended
the same unto us, ayming to extend, encrease, and advance the successive parts or parcels
of this her frame; it is no wonder if back again it is not so great from children unto
fathers. This other Aristotelian consideration remembred: that he who does benefit
another, loves him better than he is beloved of him again; and he to whom a debt is
owing, loves better than he that oweth: And every workman loves his work better than
he should be beloved of it again, if it had sense or feeling. Forasmuch as we love to be,
and being consisteth in moving and action; therefore is every man, in some sort or other,
in his own workmanship. Whosoever does a good deed, exerciseth a fair and honest
action: whosoever receiveth exerciseth only a profitable action. And profit is nothing so
much to be esteemed or loved as honesty. Honesty is firme and permanent, affording him
that did it a constant gratification. Profit is very slipperie and easily lost, nor is the

memory of it so sweet or so fresh. Such things are dearest unto us, that have cost us most;
and to give is of more cost that to take. Since it has pleased God to endow us with some
capacitie of discourse, that as beasts we should not servily be subjected to common laws,
but rather with judgement and voluntary liberty apply ourselves unto them; we ought
somewhat to yield unto the simple auctoritie of Nature, but not suffer her tyranny to carry
us away: only reason ought to have the conduct of our inclinations. As for me, my tast is
strangely distasted to its propensions, which in us are produced without the ordinance and
direction of our judgement. As upon this subject I speak of, I cannot receive this passion,
wherewith some embrace children scarsly borne, having neither motion in the soul, nor
form well to be distinguished in the body whereby they might make themselves lovely or
amiable. And I could never well endure to have them brought up or nursed near about
me. A true and well ordered affection ought to be borne and augmented, with the
knowledge they owe us of themselves; and then, if they deserve it (natural inclination
marching hand in hand with reason) to cherish and make much of them, with a perfect
fatherly love and loving friendship, and conformably to judge of them if they be
otherwise, alwayes yielding ourselves unto reason, notwithstanding natural power. For
the most part, it goeth cleane contrary, and commonly we feel ourselves more moved
with the sports, idlenesses wantonnesse, and infant-trifles of our children, than afterward
we do with all their actions, when they be men: As if we had loved them for our
pastimes, as we do apes, monkies, or perokitoes, and not as man. And some that liberally
furnish them with sporting bables while they be children, will miserably pinch it in the
least expense for necessaries when they grow men. Nay, it seems that the jelousie we
have to see them appeare into, and injoy the world, when we are ready to leave them,
makes us more sparing and close-handed toward them. It vexeth and grieveth us when we
see them following us at our heels, supposing they solicite us to be gone hence: And if we
were to fear that since the order of things beareth, that they cannot indeed, neither be, nor
live, but by our being and life, we should not meddle to be fathers. As for me, I deem it
a kind of cruelty and injustice, not to receive them into the share and society of our goods,
and to admit them as Partners in the understanding of our domestical affairs (if they be
once capable of it and not to cut off and shut-up our commodities to provide for theirs,
since we have engendred them to that purpose. It is meere injustice to see an old, crazed,
sinnow-shronken, and nigh dead father sitting alone in a Chimny-corner, to enjoy so many
goods as would suffice for the preferment and entertainment of many children, and in the
meane while, for want of means, to suffer them to lose their best dayes and years,
without thrusting them into public service and knowledge of men; whereby they are
often cast into despair, to seek, by some way how unlawfull soever to provide for their
necessaries. And in my dayes, I have seen diverse yong-men, of good houses so given to
stealing and filching, that no correction could divert them from it. I know one very well
alied, to whom, at the instance of a brother of his (a most honest, gallant, and vertuous
Gentleman) I spake to that purpose, who boldly answered and confessed unto me, that
only by the rigor and covetism of his father he had been forced and driven to fall into
such lewdnesse and wickednesse. And even at that time he came from stealing certain
jewels from a Lady, in whose bed-chamber he fortuned to come with certain other

Gentlemen when she was rising, and had almost been taken. He made me remember a
tale I had heard of another Gentleman, from his youth so fashioned and inclined to this
goodly trade of pilfering that coming afterward to be heir and Lord of his own goods,
resolved to give over that manner of life, could notwithstanding (if he chanced to come
near a shop, where he saw any thing he stood in need of) not chuse but steale the same,
though afterward he would ever send mony and pay for it. And I have seen diverse so
inured to that vice, that amongst their companions they would ordinarily steale such things
as they would restore again. I am a Gascoine, and there is no vice wherein I have less
skill: I hate it somewhat more by complexion than I accuse it by discourse. I do not so
much as desire another mans goods. And although my Countrey-men be indeed somewhat
more taxed with this fault than other Provinces of France, yet have we seen, of late
dayes, and that sundry times, men well borne and of good parentage in other parts of
France, in the hands of justice, and lawfully convicted of many most horrible robberies. I
am of opinion that in regard of these debauches and lewd actions, fathers may, in so me
sort, be blamed, and that it is only long of them. And if any shall answer me, as did once
a Gentleman of good worth and understanding, that he thriftily endevoured to hoard up
riches, to no other purpose, nor to have any use and commodity of them, than to be
honoured, respected and suingly sought unto by his friends and kinsfolke and that age
having bereaved him of all other forces, it was the only remedy he had left to maintaine
him self in authority with his houshold, and keep him from falling into contempt and
disdaine of all the world. And truly according to Aristotle, not only old-age, but each
imbecility, is the promoter and motive of covetousnesse. That is something, but it is a
remedy for an evil, whereof the birth should have been hindered, and breeding avoyded.
That father may truly be said miserable that holdeth the affection of his children tied unto
him by no other means than by the need they have of his helpe, or want of his assistance,
if that may be termed affection: A man should yield himself respectable by virtue and
sufficiency, and amiable by his goodnesse, and gentlenesse of manners. The very cinders
of so rich a matter have their value: so have the bones and relics of honorable men,
whom we hold in respect and reverence. No age can be so crazed and drooping in a man
that has lived honourably, but must needs prove venerable, and especially unto his
children, whose minds ought so to be directed by the parents, that reason and wisdom,
not necessity and need, nor rudenesse and compulsion, may make them know and
performe their dutie.
----- et errat longe, mea quidem sententia,
Qui imperium credat esse gravius aut stabilius,
Vi quod fit, quam illud quod amicitia adjungitur. --Ter. Adelph. act. i. sc. i.
39.
In mine opinion he does much mistake,
Who, that command more grave, more firme does take,
Which force does get, than that which friendships make.

I utterly condemne all manner of violence in the education of a young spirit, brought up
to honor and liberty. There is a kind of slavishnesse in churlish rigour and servility in
compulsion; and I hold that that which cannot be compassed by reason, wisdom, and
discretion, can never be attained by force and constraint. So was I brought up: they tell
me that in all my youth I never felt rod but twice, and that very lightly. And what
education I have had myself, the same have I given my children. But such is my ill hap,
that they dye all very yong: yet has Leonora my only daughter escaped this misfortune,
and attained to the age of six years, and somewhat more; for the conduct of whose youth
and punishment childish faults (the indulgence of her mother applying itself very mildly
unto it) was never other means used but gentle words. And were my desire frustrate there
are diverse other causes to take hold of without reproving my discipline, which I know to
be just and natural. I would also have been much more religious in that towards male-
children, not borne to serve as women and of a freer condition. I should have loved to
have stored their mind with ingenuity and liberty. I have seen no other effects in rods,
but to make childrens mindes more remisse, or more maliciously headstrong. Desire we to
be loved of our children! Will we remove all occasions from them to wish our death?
(although no occasion of so horrible and unnaturall wishes can either be just or excusable)
nullum scelus rationem habet, no ill deed has a good reason.
Let us reasonably accommodate their life with such things as are in our power. And
therefore should not we marry so young that our age do in a manner confound itself with
theirs. For, this inconvenience does unavoidably cast us into many difficulties and
encombrances. This I speak chiefly unto nobility, which is of an idle disposition, or
loitering condition, and which (as we say) liveth only by her lands or rents: for else, where
life standeth upon gain, plurality and company of children is an easefull furtherance of
husbandry. They are as many new implements to thrive, and instruments to grow rich. I
was married at thirty years of age and commend the opinion of thirty-five, which is said
to be Aristotles. Plato would have no man married before thirty, and has good reason to
scoffe at them that will defer it till after fifty-five and then marry; and condemneth their
breed as unworthy of life and sustenance. Thales appointed the best limits, who by his
mother being instantly urged to marry while he was young, answered that it was not yet
time; and when he came to be old, he said it was no more time. A man must refuse
opportunity to every importunate action. The ancient Gaules deemed it a shamefull
reproach to have the acquaintance of a woman before the age of twenty years; and did
especially recommend unto men that sought to be trained up in wars the careful
preservation of their maiden-head until they were of good years, forasmuch as by losing
it in youth, courages are thereby much weakned and greatly empaired, and by coupling
with women diverted from all vertuous action.
Ma hor congiunto i giovinetta sposa,
Lieto homai de’ figli’, era invilito
Ne gli afetti di padre et di marito.
But now conjoyn’d to a fresh-springing spouse,

Joy’d in his children, he was thought-abased,
In passions twixt a sire and husband placed.
Muleasses King of Thunes, he whom the Emperor Charles the fifth restored unto his
own state again, was wont to upbraid his fathers memory for so dissolutely-frequenting
of women, terming him a sloven, effeminate, and a lustfull engenderer of children. The
Greek story does note Iccus the Tarentine, Crisso, Astyllus, Diopompus, and thers, who
to keep their bodies tough and strong for the service of the Olympicke courses, wrestlings
and such bodily exercises they did, as long as they were possessed with that care,
heedefully abstaine from all venerian acts and touching of women. In a certain country of
the Spanish Indies, no man was suffered to take a wife before he were thirty years old,
and women might marry at ten years of age. There is no reason, neither is it convenient,
that a Gentleman of five and thirty years should give place to his son, that is but
twenty: For then is the father as seemly and may as well appear and set himself forward,
in all manner of voyages of wars as well by land as sea, and do his prince as good
service, in court or elsewhere, as his son: He has need of all his parts and ought truly to
impart them, but so that be forget not himself for others: And to such may justly that
answer serve which fathers have commonly in their mouthes: ’I will not put off my clothes
before I be ready to go to bed.’ But a father over-burdened with years and crazed
through sicknesse and by reason of weaknesse and want of health barred from the
common society of men, does both wrong himself, injure his, idly and to no use to hoord
up and keep close a great heape of riches and deal of pelfe. He is in state good enough, if
he be wise to have a desire to put off his clothes to go to bed. I will not say to his shirt,
but to a good warme night gowne, As for other pomp and trash whereof he has no
longer use or need, he ought willingly to distribute and bestow them amongst those to
whom by natural degree they ought to belong. It is reason he should have the use and
bequeath the fruition of them, since nature does also deprive him of them, otherwise
without doubt there is both envy and malice stirring. The worthiest action that ever the
Emperor Charles the fifth performed was this, in imitation of some ancients of his
quality, that he had the discretion to know that reason commanded us to strip or shift our
selves when our cloathes trouble and are too heavy for us, and that it is high time to go to
bed when our legs faile us. He resigned his means, his greatness and Kingdome to his
Sonne, at what time he found his former undanted resolution to decay, and force to
conduct his affairs to droope in himself, together with the glory he had thereby
acquired.
Solve senescentem m ature sanus equum ne
Peccet ad extremum ridentus, et ilia ducat. -- Hor. i. Ep. i. 8.
If you be wise, the horse grown-old betimes cast-off,
Lest he at last fall lame, foulter, and breed a skoffe.
This fault for a man not to be able to know himself betimes and not to feel the

impuissance and extreme alteration that age does naturally bring, both to the body and the
mind (which in my opinion is equall if the mind has but one halfe), has lost the
reputation of the most part of the great men in the world. I have in my dayes both seen
and familiarly knowen some men of great authority, whom a man might easily discerne, to
be strangely fallen from that ancient sufficiency, which I know by the reputation they had
thereby attained unto in their best years. I could willingly for their honors sake have
wisht them at home about their own business, discharged from all negotiations of the
commonwealth and employments of war that were no longer fit for them. I have
sometimes been familiar in a Gentleman’s house, who was both an old man and a
widdower, yet lusty of his age. This man had many daughters marriageable and a son
grown to mans state and ready to appeare in the world; a thing that drew-on and was the
cause of great charges and many visitations, wherein he took but little pleasure, not only
for the continuall care he had to save but more by reason of his age, he had betoken
himself to a manner of life far different from ours. I chanced one day to tell him
somewhat boldly (as my custom is) that it would better beseeme him to give us place and
resigne his chief house to his son (for he had no other mannor-house conveniently well
furnished), and quietly retire himself to some farme of his where no man might trouble
him or disturbe his rest, since he could not otherwise avoid our importunitie, seeing the
condition of his children; who afterward followed my counsell and found great ease by it.
It is not to be said that they hate any thing given them by such a way of obligation, which
a man may not recall again: I, that am ready to play such a part, would give over unto
them the full possession of my house and enjoying of my good and limited condition as if
they should give me occasion, I might repent myself of my gift and revoke my deed. I
would leave the use and fruition of all unto them, the rather because it were no longer fit
for me to weald the same. And touching the disposing of all matters in grosse, I would
reserve what I pleased unto my self. Having ever judged that it must be a great
contentment to an aged father, himself to direct his children in the government of his
household affairs, and to be able while himself liveth to checks and controule their
demeanors, storing them with instruction and advised counsell, according to the
experience he has had of them, and himself to address the ancient honor and order of
his house in the hands of his successours, and that way warrant himself of the hope he
may conceive of their future conduct and or success. And to this effect I would not shun
their company. I would not be far from them, but as much as the condition of my age
would permit, enjoy and be a partner of their sports, mirths, and feasts. If I did not
continually live amongst them (as I could not well without offending their meetings and
hindering their recreation, by reason of the peevish forwardnesse of my age and the
trouble of my infirmities, and also without forcing their rules, and resisting the form of
life I should then follow), I would at least live near them, in some corner of my house,
not the best and fairest in show, but the most easefull and commodious. And not, as some
years since I saw a Deane of S. Hillarie of Poictiers, reduced by reason and the
incommoditie of his melancholy to such a continuall solitarinesse, that when I entered into
his chamber he had never removed one step out of it in two and twenty years before; yet
had all his faculties free and easy, only a rheume excepted that fell into his stomacke.

Scarce once a weeke would he suffer any body to come and see him. He would ever be
shut up in his chamber all alone, where no man should come, except a boy, who once a
day brought him meat, and who might not tarry there, but as soone as he was in must go
out again. All his exercise was sometimes to walke up and down his chamber, aud now
and then read on some book (for he had some understanding of letters) but obstinately
resolved to live and dye in that course, as he did shortly after. I would endeavor by a
kind of civil demeanour and mild conversation to breede and settle in my children a true-
harty loving friendship, and unfained good will towards me: a thing easily obtained
amongst well-borne mindes, For if they prove, or be such surly-furious beasts, or given to
churlish disobedience, as our age bringeth forth thousands, they must as beasts be hated,
as churls neglected, and as degenerate avoided. I hate this custom, to forbid children to
call their fathers father, and to teach them another strange name, as of more reverence; as
if nature had not sufficiently provided for our authority. We call God Almighty by the
name of father, and disdaine our children should call us so. I have reformed this fault in
my own household. It is also folly and injustice to deprive children, especially being of
competent age, of their fathers familiaritie, and ever to show them a surly, austere, grim,
and disdainefall countenance, hoping thereby, to keep them in awful fear and duteous
obedience. For it is a very unprofitable proceeding and which maketh fathers yrkesome
unto children, and which is worse, ridiculous. They have youth and strength in their
hands, and consequently the breath and favor of the world; and do with mockery and
contempt receive these churlish, fierce, and tyrannical countenances, from a man that has
no lusty blood left him, neither in his heart nor in his vaines; meere bugbeares, and scar-
crowes, to scare birdes withall. If it lay in my power to make my self feared, I had rather
make my self beloved. There are so many sorts of defects in age, and so much
impuissance; it is so subject to contempt, that the best purchase it can make is the good
will, love and affection of others. Commandement and fear are no longer her weapons. I
have known one whose youth had been very imperious and rough, but when he came to
mans age, although he live in as good plight and health as may be, yet he chaseth, he
scoldeth, he brawleth, he fighteth, he sweareth, and biteth, as the most boistrous and
tempestuous master of France; he frets and consumes himself with carke and care and
vigilancy (all which is but a jugling and ground for his familiar to play upon, and cozen
him the more) as for his goods, his garners, his cellars, his coffers, indeed his purse, whilst
himself keepes the keyes of them close in his bosome and under his boulster, as charily
as he does his eyes, other enjoy and command the better part of them; whilst he pleaseth
and flattereth himself with the niggardly sparing of his table, all goth to wracke, and is
lavishly wasted in diverse corners of his house, in play, in riotous spending, and in
soothingly entertaining the accompts or tales of his vain chasing, foresight, and
providing. Every man watcheth and keepeth sentinell against him, if any silly or heedless
servant do by fortune apply himself unto it, he is presently made to suspect him. A
quality on which age does immediately bite of itself. How many times has he vaunted
and applauding himself the strict orders of his house, of his good husbandry, of the awe
he kept his household in, and of the exact obedience and regardfull reverence he received
of all his family, and how clear-sighted he was in his own business:

Ille solus nescit omnia. -- Ter. Adel. act. iv. sc. ii. 9.
Of all things none but he,
Most ignorant must be.
I know no man that could produce more parts, both natural and artificiall, fit to preserve
his masterie, and to maintaine his absolutenesse, than he does; yet is he cleane falne from
them like a child. Therefore have I made choice of him amongst many such conditions
that I know, as most exemplare. It were a matter beseeming a scholasticall question,
whether it be better so or otherwise. In his presence all things give place unto him. This
vain course is ever left unto his authority, that he is never gain-said. He is had in awe, he
is feared, he is beleeved, he is respected his belly-full, Does he discharge any boy or
servant? he presently trusseth up his packe, then he is gone; but whither? only out of his
sight, not out of his house. The steps of age are so slow, the senses so troubled, the mind
so distracted, that he shall live and do his office a whole year in one same house, and
never be perceived. And when fit time or occasion serveth, letters are produced from far
places, humbly suing and pittifully complayning, with promises to do better and to
amend, by which he is brought into favor and office again. Does the master make any
bargaine or dispatch that pleaseth not, it is immediately smothered and supressed soon
after forging causes, and devising colourable excuses, to excuse the want of execution or
answer. No forraine letters being first presented unto him, he seeth but such as are fit for
his knowledge. lf perhaps they come into his hands, as he that trusteth some one of
his men to read them unto him, he will presently devise what he thinketh good, whereby
they often invent that such a one seems to aske him forgivenesse, that wrongeth him by
his letter. To conclude, he never looks into his own business, but by a disposed,
designed and as much as may be pleasing image, so contrived by such as are about him,
because they will not stir up his choler, move his impatience, and exasperate his
frowardnesse. I have seen under different formes many long and constant, and of like
effect, economies. It is ever proper unto women to be readily bent to contradict and crosse
their husbands. They will with might and main, hand over head, take hold of any colour
to thwart and withstand them: the first excuse they meet with serves them as a plenary
justification. I have seen some that would in grosse steale from their husbands to the end
(as they told their Confessor) they might give the greater almes. Trust you to such
religious dispensations. They think no liberty to have or managing to possesse sufficient
authority, if it come from their husbands consent: They must necessarily usurpe it, either
by wily craft or main force, and ever iniuriously, thereby to give it more grace and
authority. As in my discourse, when it is against a poore old man, and for children, then
take they hold of this title, and therewith gloriously serve their turn and passion, and as in
a common servitude, easily usurpe and monopolize against his government and
domination. If they be men-children, tall, of good spirit, and forward, then they presently
suborne, either by threats, force, or favor, both Steward, Bailiffe, Clarke, Receiver, and
all the Fathers Officers, and Servant. Such as have neither wife nor children, do more

hardly fall into his mischief; but yet more cruelly and unworthily. Old Cato was wont to
say, ’So many servants, so many enemies.’ Note whether according to the distance that was
between the purity of his age, and the corruption of our times, he did not fore-warne us
that wives, children, and servants are to us so many enemies. Well fits it decrepitude to
store us with the sweet benefit of ignorance and unperceiving facility wherewith we are
deceived. If we did yield unto it, what would become of us? Doe we not see that even
then if we have any suits in lawe, or matters to be decided before Judges, both Lawyers
and Judges will commonly take part with and favor our childrens causes against us, as
men interested in the same? And if I chance not to spy or plainly perceive how I am
cheated, cozoned and beguiled, I must of necessitie discover in the end how I am subject,
and may be cheated, beguiled, and cozened. And shall the tongue of man ever be able to
express the ynvaluable worth of a friend, in comparison of these civill bonds? The lively
image and idea whereof I perceive to be among beasts so unspotted. Oh, with what
religion do I respect and observe the same! If others deceive me, yet do I not deceive my
self, to esteeme my self capable and of power to looke unto my self, nor to trouble my
braines to yield my self unto it. I do beware and keep my self from such treas ons,
and cunny-catching in my own bosome, not by an unquiet and tumultuary curiosity, but
rather by a diversion and resolution. When I hear the state of any one reported or
discoursed of, I ammuse not my self on him, but presently cast mine eyes on my self,
and all my wits together, to see in what state I am, aud how it goeth with me. Whatsoever
concerneth him, the same has relation to me. His fortunes forewarn me, and summon up
my spirits that way; There is no day nor hour but we speak that of others we might
properly speak of ourselves, could we as well enfold as we can infold our consideration.
And many authours do in this manner wound the protection of their cause by over-rashly
running against that which they take hold of, thirling such darts at their enemies that might
with much more advantage be cast at them. The Lord of Montluc, late one of the Lord
Marshals of France, having lost his son, who died in the Iland of Madera, a worthy,
forward and gallant young gentleman, and truely of good hope, amongst other his griefes
and regrets did greatly move me to condole the infinite displeasure and hearts-sorrow that
he felt, inasmuch as he had never communicated and opened himself vnto him: for, with
his austere humor and continuall endeavoring to hold a grimme-stern-fatherly gravity
over him, he had lost the means perfectly to find and throughly to know his son, and
so to manifest vnto him the extreme affection he bare him, and the worthy judgement he
made of his virtue. ’Alas,’ was he wont to say, ’the poore lad saw never anything in me but
a severe-surly countenance, full of disdaine, and perhaps was possessed with this conceit,
that I could neither love nor esteeme him according to his merits. Ay-me, to whom did I
reserve, to discover that singular and loving affection which in my soul I bare unto him?
Was it not he that should have had all the pleasure and acknowledgenient thereof? I have
forced and tormented my self to maintaine this vain maske, and have vtterly lost the
pleasure of his conversation, and therwithal his good will, which surely was but faintly
cold towards me, forasmuch as he never received but rude entertainement of me, and
never felt but a tyrannical proceeding in me towards him. I am of opinion his complaint
was reasonable and well grounded. For, as I know by certain experience, there is no

comfort so sweet in the loss of friends, as that our own knowledge or conscience tels vs
we never omitted to tell them everything, and expostulate all matters vnto them, and to
have had a perfect and free communication with them. Tell me, my good friend, am I the
better or the worse by having a taste of it? Surely I am much the better. His grief does
both comfort and honor me. Is it not a religious and pleasing office of my life for ever
to make the obsequies thereof? Can there be any pleasure worth this privation? I do
unfold and open my self as much as I can to my own people, and willingly declare the
state of my will and judgment towards them, as commonly I do towards all men: I make
haste to produce and present my self, for I would have no man mistake me, in what part
soever. Amongst other particular customs which our ancient Gaules had as Cæsar
affirmeth), this was one, that children never came before their fathers, nor were in any
public assembly seen in their company, but when they began to bear arms: as if they
would infer that then was the time fathers should admit them to their acquaintance and
familiarity. I have also observed another kind of indiscretion in some fathers of our
times, who during their own life would never be induced to acquaint or impart unto their
children that share or portion which, by the Law of Nature, they were to have in their
fortunes: nay, some there are who, after their death, bequeath and commit the same
auctoritie over them and their goods , unto their wives, with full power and law to dispose
of them at their pleasure. And my self have knowen a Gentleman, a chief officer of our
crowne, that by right and hope of succession (had he lived unto it) was to inherit above
fifty thousand crownes a yeere good land, who at the age of more then fifty yeeres, fell
into such necessity and want, and was run so far in debt, that he had nothing left him,
and, as it is supposed, died for very need: while his mother, in her extreme decrepitude,
enjoyed all his lands and possessed all his goods, by virtue of his fathers will and
testament, who had lived very near foure-score years: a thing (in my conceit) no way to
be commended, but rather blamed. Therefore do I think that a man but little advantaged
or bettered in estate who is able to liue of himself, and is out of debt, especially if he
have children, and goeth about to marry a wife that must have a great joynter out of his
lands, assuredly there is no other debt that brings more ruine vnto houses than that. My
predecessors have commonly followed this counsell, and so have I, and all have found
good by it. But those that disswade vs from marrying of rich wives, lest they might proove
over disdainful and peevish, or less tractable and loving, are also deceived to make us
neglect and forgoe a reall commoditie for so frivolous a conjecture, To an unreasonable
woman, it is all one cost to her whether they pass under one reason or under another.
’They love to be where they are most wronged.’ Injustice does allure them, as the honor of
their vertuous actions enticeth the good. And by how much richer they are, so much more
mild and gentle are they; as more willingly and gloriously chaste, by how much fairer
they are. Some colour of reason there is, men should leave the administration of their
goods and affairs unto mothers while their children are not of competent age, or fit
according to the laws to manage the charge of them: And ill has their father brought
them up, if he cannot hope, these coming to years of discretion, they shal have no more
wit, reason, and sufficiencie, than his wife, considering the weaknesse of their sexe. Yet
truly were it as much against nature so to order things that mothers must wholy depend on

their childrens discretion. They ought largely and competently to be provided wherewith
to maintaine their estate according to the quality of their house and age: because ’need and
want is much more unseemely and hard to he indured in women than in men:’ And
children rather than mothers ought to be charged therewith. In general, my opinion is that
the best distribution of goods is, when we die, to distribute them according to the custom
of the Country. The laws have better thought upon them than we: And better is it to let
them erre in their election than for us rashly to hazard to faile in ours. They are not
properly our own, since without us, and by a civil prescription, they are appointed to
certain successours. And albeit we have some further liberty, I think it should be a great
and most apparent cause to induce us to take from one, and barre him from that which
Fortune has allotted him, and the common laws and Justice has called him unto: And
that against reason we abuse this liberty, by suting the same unto our private humors and
frivolous fantasies. My fortune has been good, inasmuch as yet it never presented me
with any occasions that might tempt or divert my affections from the common and lawful
ordinance. I see some towards whom it is but labor lost, carefully to endeavor to do any
good offices. A word ill taken defaceth the merit of ten yeeres. Happy he that, at this last
passage, is ready to sooth and applaud their will. The next action transporteth him; not the
best and most frequent offices, but the freshest and present work the deede. They are the
people that play with their wils and testaments as with apples and rods, to gratify or
chastize every action of those who pretend any interest thereunto. It is a matter of over-
long pursute, and of exceeding consequence, at every instance to be thus dilated, and
wherein the wiser sort establish themselves once for all, chiefely respecting reason and
public observance. We somewhat over-much take these masculine substitutions to hart,
and propose a ridiculous eternity unto our names. We also over-weight such vain future
conjectures, which infant-spirits give us. It might perhaps have been from out my
rancke, because I was the dullest, the slowest, the unwillingest, the most leaden-pated to
learn my lesson or any good, that ever was not only of all my brethren, but of all the
children in my countrie, were the lesson concerning my exercise of the mind or body. It
is folly to trie any extraordinarie conclusions upon the trust of their divinations, wherein
we are so often deceived. If this rule may be contradicted, and the destinies corrected, in
the choice they have made of our heirs, with so much more apparence, may it be done in
consideration of some remarkable and enormous corporall deformitie; a constant and
incorrigible vice; and according to us great esteemers of beautie; a matter of important
prejudice. The pleasant dialogue of Plato the law-giver, with his citizens, will much
honor this passage: "Why then,’ say they, perceiving their end to approach, ’shall we not
dispose of that which, is our own to whom and according as we please? O Gods, what
cruelty is this? That it shall not be lawfull for us to give or bequeath more or less,
according to our fantasies, to such as have served us, and taken paines with us in our
sicknesses, in our age, and in our business?’ To whom the law-giver answereth in this
manner: ’My friends,’ says he, ’who doubtlesse shall shortly die, it is a hard matter for you
both to know yourselves and what is your’s according to the Delphike inscription: As for
me, who am the maker of your laws, I am of opinion that neither yourselves are your
own, nor that which you enjoy. And both you and your goods, past and to come, belong

to your familie; and, moreover, both your families and your goods are the
commonwealth’s. Wherefore, lest any flatterer, either in your age or in time of sickness, or
any other passion, should unadvisedly induce you to make any unlawfull conveyance or
unjust will and testament, I will looke to you and keep you from it. But having an
especiall respect both to the universall interest of your City, and particular state of your
houses, I will establish laws, and by reason make you perceive and confesse that a
particular commoditie ought to yield to a public benefit. Follow that course meerely
whereto humane necessitie does call you.’ To me it belongeth, who have no more regard to
one thing than to another, and who, as much as I can, take care for the general, to have a
regardful respect of that which you leave behind you. But to return to my former
discourse, me thinkes we seldom see that woman borne to whom the superioritie or
majestie over men is due, except the motherly and natural; unless it be for the
chastisement of such as by some fool-febricitant humor have voluntarily submitted
themselves unto them: But that does nothing concerne old women, of whom we speak
here. It is the apparence of this consideration has made us to frame and willingly to
establish this law (never seen elsewhere) that barreth women from the succession of this
crowne, and there are few principalities in the world where it is not alleged, as well as
here, by a likely and apparent reason, which authoriseth the same. But fortune has given
more credit unto it in some places than in other some. It is dangerous to leave the
dispensation of our succession unto their judgement, according to the choyse they shall
make of their children, which is most commonly unjust and fantastic. For the same
unrulie appetite and distasted relish, or strange longings, which they have when they are
great with child, the same have they at al times in their minds. They are commonly seen
to affect the weakest, the simplest and most abject, or such, if they have any, that had
more need to sucke. For, wanting reasonable discourse to chuse, and embrace what they
ought, they rather suffer themselves to be directed where nature’s impressions are most
single as other creatures, which take no longer knowledge of their yonng ones than they
are sucking. Moreover, experience does manifestly show unto us that the same natural
affection to which we ascribe so much authority, has but a weake foundation. For a very
small gain we daily take mothers own children from them and induce them to take
charge of ours. Doe we not often procure them to bequeath their children to some foolish,
filthie, sluttish, and unhealthie nurce, to whom we would be very loth to commit ours, or
to some brutish goat, not only forbidding them to nurce and feed their own children,
what danger soever may betide them, but also to have any care of them, to the end they
may the more diligently follow and carefully attend the service of ours? Whereby we
soone see through custom a certain kind of bastard affection to be engendered in them,
more vehement than the natural, and to be much more tender and careful for the welfare
and preservation of other men’s children than for their own. And the reason why I have
made mention of goats is, because it is an ordinary thing round about me where I dwell to
see the countrie women, when they have not milke enough to feed their infants with their
own breasts, to call for goats to helpe them. And myself have now two lackies wayting
on me, who except it were eight days never suck’t other milk than goats. They are
presently to come at call and give young infants sucke, and become so well acquainted

with their voice that when they hear them crie they run forthwith unto them. And if by
chance they have any other child put to their teats then their nurseling, they refuse and
reject him, and so does the child a strange goat. Myselfe saw that one not long since, from
whom the father took a goat, which he had sucked two or three days, because he had but
borrowed it of one of his neighbors, who could never be induced to sucke any other,
where by he shortly died, and, as I verily think, of meere hunger. Beasts, as well as we,
do soon alter, and easily bastardize their natural affection. I believe that in that which
Herodotus reporteth of a certain province of Libia, their often followeth great error and-
mistaking. He says that men do indifferently use, and as it were in common frequent
women, and that the child, as soone as he is able to go, coming to any solemn
meetings and great assemblies, led by a natural instinct, findeth out hes own father;
where being turned loose in the middest of the multitude, looke what man the child does
first addresse his steps unto, and then go to him, the same is ever afterward reputed to be
his right father. Now if we shall duly consider this simple occasion of loving our children,
because we have begotten them, for which we call them our other selves; it seems there
is another production coming from us, and which is of no less recommendation and
consequence. For what we engender by the mind, the fruits of our courage, sufficiencie,
or spirit, are brought forth by a far more noble part than the corporall, and more our own.
We are both father and mother together in this generation; such fruits cost us much dearer
and bring us more honor, and chiefly if they have any good or rare thing in them. For the
value of our other children is much more theirs than ours. The share we have in them is
but little, but of these all the beautie, all the grace, and all the worth is ours. And therefore
do they represent and resemble us much more lively than others. Plato addeth, moreover,
that these are immortant issues, and immortalize their fathers, indeed desire them, as
Licurgus, Solon, and Minos. All histories being full of examples of this mutual friendship
of fathers toward their children, I have not thought it amisse to set down some choice
ones of this kind. Heliodorus, that good Bishop of Tricea, loved rather to lose the
dignity, profit, and devotion of so venerable a prelateship than to forgoe his daughter, a
young woman to this day commended for her beautie, but perhaps somewhat more curiously
and wantonly pranked up than beseemed the daughter of a churchman and a Bishop, and
of over-amorous behaviour. There was one Labienus, in Rome, a man of great worth and
authority, and amongst other commendable qualities, most excellent in all manner of
learning, who, as I think, was the son of that great Labienus, chief of all the captaines
that followed and were under Cæsar in the wars against the Gaules, and who afterward
taking great Pompey’s part, behaved himself so valiantly and so constantly, that he never
forsooke him until Cæsar defeated him in Spain. This Labienus, of whom I spake, had
many that envied his vertues: but above all, as it is likely, courtiers, and such as in his time
were favored of the Emperors, who hated his franknesse, his fatherly humors, and distaste
he bare still against tyrannie, wherewith it may be supposed he had stuffed his bookes and
compositions. His adversaries vehemently pursued him before the magistrate of Rome,
and prevailed so far that many of his works which he had published were condemned to
be burned. He was the first on whom this new example of punishment was put in practice,
which after continued long in Rome, and executed on diverse others, to punish learning,

studies, and writings with death and consuming fire. There were neither means enough, or
matter sufficient of crueltie, unless we had entermingled among them things which
nature has exempted from all sense and sufferance, as reputation, and the inventions of
our mind: and except we communicated corporall mischiefs unto disciplines and
monuments of the muses. Which loss Labienus could not endure, nor brooke to survive
those his dear and highly-esteemed issues, and therefore caused himself to be carried,
and shut up alive within his authors monument, where, with a dreadlesse resolution, he at
once provided both to kill himself and be buried together. It is hard to show any more
vehement fatherly affection than that. Cassius Severus, a most eloquent man, and his
familiar friend, seeing his bookes burnt, exclaimed, that by the same sentence he should
therewithall be condemned to be burned alive, for he still bare and kept in mind what
they contained in them. A like accident happened to Geruntius Cordus, who was accused
to have commended Brutus and Cassius in his bookes. That base, senile, and corrupted
Senate, and worthie of a far worse master than Tiberius, adjudged his writings, to be
consumed by fire; and he was pleased to accompany them in their death, for he pined
away by abstaining from all manner of meat. That notable man Lucane, being adjudged by
that lewd varlet, Nero, to death, at the latter end of his life, when al his blood was well-
nigh spent from out the veins of his arm, which by his physician he had caused to be
opened to hasten his death, and that a chilling cold began to seize the uttermost parts of
his limbes, and approach his vital spirits, the last thing he had in memory was some of his
own verses, written in his book of the Pharsalian wars, which with a distinct voice
he repeated, and so yielded up the ghost, having those last words in his mouth. What was
that but a kind, tender, and fatherly farewell which he took of his children? representing
the last adiewes, and parting embracements, which at our death we give vnto our dearest
issues? And an effect of that natural inclination, which in that last extremity puts us in
mind of those things which in our life we have held dearest and most precious? Shall we
imagine that Epicurus, who (as himself said) dying tormented with the extreme pain of
the chollik, had all his comfort in the beauty of the doctrine which he left behinde him in
the world, would have received as much contentment of a number of well-borne and
better-bred children (if he had had any) as he did of the production of his rich
compositions? And if it had been in his choise, to leave behind him either a counterfeit,
deformed, or ill-borne child, or a foolish, triviall, and idle book, not only he, but all
men in the world besides of like learning and sufficiency, would much rather have chosen
to incur the former than the latter mischief. It might perhaps be deemed impiety in
Saint Augustine (for example-sake) if on the one part one should propose unto him to bury
all his bookes, whence our religion receiveth so much good, or to interre his children of in
case he had any) that he would not rather chuse to bury his children, or the issue of his
loynes, than the fruits of his mind. And I wot not well, whether my self should not much
rather desire to beget and produce a perfectly-well-shaped and excellently-qualited infant,
by the acquaintance of the Muses, than by the acquaintance of my wife. Whatsoever I give
to this, let the world allow of it as it please, I give it as purely and irrevocable as any man
can give it to his corporall children. That little good which I have done him is no longer in
my disposition. He may know many things that my self know no longer, and hold of me

what I could not hold my self: and which (if need should require) I must borrow of him
as of a stranger. If I be wiser than be, he is richer than I. There are few men given unto
Poesie that would not esteeme it for a greater honor to be the fathers of Virgils Æneidos
than of the goodliest boy in Rome, and that would not rather endure the loss of the one
than the perishing of the other. For, according to Aristotle, ’Of all workemen, the Poet is
principally the most amorous of his productions and conceited of his Labours.’ It is not
easy to be beleeved that Epaminondas, who wanted to leave some daughters behind him,
which unto all posterity, should one day highly honor their father (they were the two
famous victories which be had gained of the Lacedemonians) would ever have given his
free consent to change them with the best-borne, most gorgeous, and goodliest damsels of
all Greece: or that Alexander and Cæsar did ever wish to be deprived of the greatness of
their glorious deeds of war, for the commodity to have children and heirs of their own
bodies, how absolutely-perfect and well accomplished so ever they might be. Nay, I mahe
a great question whether Phidias, or any other excellent Statuary, would as highly esteeme
and dearely love the preservation and successfull continuance of his natural children, as
be would an exquisite and matchlesse-wrought Image, that with long study and diligent
care he had perfected according unto art. And as concerning those vicious and furious
passions which sometimes have inflamed some fathers to the love of their daughters, or
mothers towards their sons, the very same and more partially-earnest is also found in
this other kind of child-bearing and alliance. Witness that which is reported of
Pigmalion, who having curiously framed a goodly statue of a most singularly-beauteous
woman, was so strange-fondly and passionately surprised with the lustfull love of his
own workmanship that the Gods through his raging importunity were faine in favor of
him to give it life.
Tentatum mollescit ebur, positogue rigore
Subsidit digitis. -- Ovid. Metam. x. 283.
As he assaid it, the ivory softned much,
And (hardnesse left) did yield to fingers touch.




Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER IX:. OF THE PARTHIANS ARMES.






CHAPTER IX:. OF THE PARTHIANS ARMES.
T is a vitious, foolish, fashion of the Nobility and Gentry of our age, and
full of nice-tenderness, never to betake themselves to arms, except
upon some urgent and extreme necessitie: and to quit them as soone as
they perceive the least hope or apparence that the danger is past;
Whence ensue many disorders, and inconveniences: For, every one
running and calling for his arms when the alarm is given, some have
not yet buckled their cuirace when their fellowes are already defeated. Indeed our
forefathers would have their Caske, Lance, Gantlets, and Shields carried, but so long as
the service lasted, themselves would never leave-off their other peeces. Our troopes are
now all confounded and disordered, by reason of bag and baggage, of carriages of lackies,
and foot-boies, wh ich because of their masters arms they carry, can never leave them.
Titus Livius, speaking of the French, says, Intolerantissima laboris corpora vix arma
humeris gerebant (LIV. Dec. i. 10.). ’Their bodies most impatient of labor could hardly
bear armour on their backes.’ Divers Nations, as they did in former times, so yet at this
day, are seen to go to the wars, without any thing about them, or if they had, it was of

no defense; but were all naked and bare.
Tegmina quas capitum raptus de suber e cortex. -- VIR. Æn. 1. 742.
Whose caske to cover all their head,
Was made of barke from Corke-tree flea’d.
Alexander, the most daring and hazardous Captain that ever was, did very seldom arm
himself: And those which amongst us neglect them, do not thereby much empaire their
reputation. If any man chance to be slain for want of an armour, there are as many more
that miscarry with the over-heavy burden of their arms, and by them are engaged, and by
a counterbutte are brused, or otherwise defeated. For in truth to see the unweildy weight of
our and their thicknesse, it seems we but endeavor to defend ourselves, and we are
rather charged than covered by them. We have enough to do to endure the burden of
them, and are so engived and shackled in them, as if we were to fight but with the shocke
or brunt of our arms, and as if we were as much bound to defend them as they to shield
us. Cornelius Tacitus does pleasantly quip and jest at the men of war of our ancient
Gaules, so armed, only to maintaine themselves, as they that have no meane either to
offend or to be offended, or to raise themselves being overthrowne. Lucullus seeing
certain Median men at arms, which were in the front of Tigranes Army, heavily and
unweildily armed, as in an iron prison, apprehended thereby an opinion that he might
easily defeat them, and began to charge them first, and got the victory. And now that our
Muskettiers, are in such credit, I think we shall have some invention found to immure us
up, that so we may be warranted from them, and to traine us to the wars in Skonces and
Bastions, as those which our fathers caused to be carried by Elephants. A humor far
different from that of Scipio the younger, who sharply reprooved his soldiers because
they had scattered certain Calthropes under the water alongst a dike, by which those of
the Town that he had besieged might sally out upon him, saying, that those which
assailed should resolve to enterprise and not to fear: And had some reason to fear that
this provision might secure and lull their vigilancy asleepe to guard themselves. Moreover
he said to a young man, that showed him a fair shield he had, ’Indeed good youth, it is a
fair one; but a Roman souldier ought to have more confidence in his right hand than in
his left.’ It is only custom that makes the burden of our arms intolerable unto us.
L’usbergo in dosso haveano, e l’elmo in testa,
Due di quelli guerrier dei quali io canto.
Ne notte o di dopo ch’entraro in questa
Stanza, gl’haveano mai messi da canto;
Che facile a portar come la resta
Era lor, perche in vso l’havean tanto. -- ARIOST. Orl. can. xii. stan. 30.
Cuirasse on backe did those two warriors bear,
And caske on head, of whom I make report,

Nor day, nor night, after they entered there,
Had they them laid aside from their support
They could with ease them as a garment weare,
For long time had they usde them in such sort.
The Emperor Caracalla in leading of his Army was ever wont to march afoot armed at
all assaies. The Roman footmen caried not their motions, sword, and target only, as for
other arms (says Cicero) they were so accustomed to weare them continually, that they
hindered them no more than their limbs: Arma enim, membra militia esse dicunt: for they
say, armor and weapon are a soldiers limbs; but therewithal such victuals as they should
need for a fortnight and a certain number of stakes to make their rampards or palisadoes
with, so much as weighed three score pound weight. And Marius, his soldiers thus loden,
marching in battal array, were taught to march five leagues in five hours, indeed six if need
required. Their military discipline was much more laboursome than ours: so did it produce
far different effects. Scipio the younger, reforming his army in Spain, appointed his
soldiers to eat no meat but standing, and nothing sodden or rosted. It is worth there
membrance how a Lacedemonian souldier being in an expedition of war, was much
noted and blamed because he was once seen to seek for shelter under a house. They
were so hardened to endure all manner of labor and toyle that it was counted a
reprochfull infamy for a souldier to be seen under any other roofe than that of heavens
vault, in what weather soever. Were we to do so, we should never lead our men far.
Marcellinus, a man well trained in the Roman wars, does curiously observe the manner
which the Parthians used to arm themselves, and noteth it so much the more by how
much it was far different from the Romans. They had (says he) certain arms so
curiously enter-wrought as they seemed to be made like feathers, which nothing hindered
the stirring of their, bodies and yet so strong, that our darts hitting them did rather
rebound, or glance by, than hurt them (they be the scales our ancestors were so much wont
to use). In another place they had (says he) their horses stiffe and strong, covered with
thick hides, and themselves armed from head to foot with massie iron plates so artificially
contrived that where the joints are there they furthered the motion and helped the stirring.
A man would have said they had been men made of yron, for they had peeces so
handsomly fitted, and so lively representing the form and parts of the face, that there was
no way to wound them but at certain little holes before their eyes, which served to give
them some light, and by certain chinkes about their nostrils by which they hardly drew
breath.
Flexilis inductis animator lamina nembris,
Horribilis visu, credas simulacra moveri
Ferrea, cognatoque viros spirare metallo.
Par vestitus equis, ferrata fronte minantur,
Ferratosque movent securi vulneris armos. --CLAUD. in Ruf. l. ii. 358.
The bending plate is hook’t on limbes orespread,

Fearefull to fight, steele images seem’d lead,
And men to breathe in mettall with them bred,
Like furniture for horse, with steeled head,
They threat, and safe from wound,
With barr’d limbs tread the ground.
See-here a description much resembling the equipage of a complete French-man-at-
arms with all his bards. Plutarke reporteth that Demetrius caused two armours to be
made, each one weighing six score pounds: one for himself, the other for Alcinus, the
chief man of war that was next to him: whereas all common armours weighed but three
score.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER X: OF BOOKS






CHAPTER X: OF BOOKS
MAKE no doubt but it shall often befall me to speak of things which
are better, and with more truth, handled by such as are their crafts-
masters. Here is simply an essay of my natural faculties, and no whit of
those that I have acquired. And he that shall task me with ignorance
shall have no great victory at my hands; for hardly could I give others
reasons for my discourses that give none unto my self, and am not
well satisfied with them. He that shall make search after knowledge, let him seek it where
it is: there is nothing I professe less. These are but my fantasies by which I endeavor not
to make things known, but my self. They may perhaps one day be known unto me, or have
bin at other times, according as fortune has brought me where they were declared or
manifested. But I remember them no more. And if I be a man of some reading, yet I am a
man of no remembering. I conceive no certainty, except it be to give notice how far the
knowledge I have of it does now reach. Let no man busie himself about the matters, but
on the fashion I give them. Let that which I borrow be surveied, and then tell me whether I
have made good choice of ornaments to beautifie and set foorth the invention which ever
comes from me. For I make others to relate (not after my own fantastie, but as it best
falleth out) what I cannot so well express either through unskill of language or want of

judgement. I number not my borrowings, but I weigh them. And if I would have made
their number to prevail, I would have had twice as many. They are all, or almost all, of so
famous and ancient names that me thinks they sufficiently name themselves without me.
If in reasons, comparisons, and arguments, I transplant any into my soile, or confound
them with my own, I purposely conceal the author, thereby to bridle the rashnesse of
these hastie censures that are so headlong cast upon all manner of compositions, namely
young writings of men yet living; and in vulgare that admit all the world to talk of them
and which seems to convince the conception and public designs likewise. I will have them
to give Plutarch a bob upon my own lips, and vex themselves in wronging Seneca in
me. My weaknesse must be hidden under such great credits. I will love him that shal
trace or unfeather me; I meane through clearenesse of judgement, and by the only
distinction of the force and beautie of my discourses. For my self, who for want of
memory am ever to seek how to trie and refine them by the knowledge of their country,
knowe perfectly, by measuring my own strength, that my soyle is no way capable of
some over-pretious flowers that therein I find set, and that all the fruits of my increase
could not make it amends. This am I bound to answer for if I hinder my self, if there be
either vanity or fault in my discourses that I perceive not or am not able to discerne if
they be showed me. For many faults do often escape our eyes; but the infirmitie of
judgement consisteth in not being able to perceive them when another discovereth them
unto us. Knnowledge and truth may be in us without judgement, and we may have
judgement without them indeed, the acknowledgement of ignorance is one of the best and
surest testimonies of judgement that I can find. I have no other sergeant of band to
marshall my rapsodies than fortune. And looke how my humors or conceits present
themselves, so I shuffle them up. Sometimes they prease thicke and three fold, and other
times they come out languishing one by one. I will have my natural and ordinary pace
seen as loose and shuffling as it is. As I am so go I on plodding. And besides, these are
matters that a man may not be ignorant of, and rashly and casually to speak of them. I
would wish to have a more perfect understanding of things, but I will not purchase it so
dear as it cost. My intention is to pass the remainder of my life quietly and not
laboriously, in rest and not in care. There is nothing I will trouble or vex myself about, no
not for science itself, what esteeme soever it be of. I do not search and tosse over books
but for an honester recreation to please, and pastime to delight my self: or if I studie, I
only endeavor to find out the knowledge that teacheth or handleth the knowledge of my
self, and which may instruct me how to die well and how to live well.
Has meus ad metas sudet oportet equus. -- Propert. iv. El. i. 70.
My horse must sweating run,
That this goale may be wonne.
If in reading I fortune to meet with any difficult plants, I fret not my self about them,
but after I have given them a charge or two, I leave them as I found them. Should I
earnestly plod upon them, I should loose both time and my self, for I have a skipping wit.

What I see not at the first view, I shall less see it if I opinionate my self upon it. I do
nothing without blithnesse; and an over obstinate continuation and plodding contention
does dazle, dull, and wearie the same: my sight is thereby confounded and diminished. I
must therefore withdraw it, and at fittes go to it again. Even as to judge well of the
lustre of scarlet we are taught to cast our eyes over it, in running over by diverse glances,
sodaine glimpses and reiterated reprisings. If one book seem tedious unto me I take
another, which I follow not with any earnestnesse, except it be at such hours as I am idle,
or that I am weary with doing nothing. I am not greatly affected to new books, because
ancient Authors are, in my judgement, more full and pithy: nor am I much addicted to
Greeke books, forasmuch as my understanding cannot well rid his work with a childish
and apprentise intelligence. Amongst modern bookes meerly pleasant, I esteeme Bocace
his Decameron, Rabelais, and the kisses of John the second (if they may be placed under
this title), worth the paines-taking to read them. As for Amadis and such like trash of
writings, they had never the credit so much as to allure my youth to delight in them. This I
will say more, either boldly or rashly that this old and heavy-pased mind of mine will no
more be pleased with Aristotle, or tickled with good Ovid: his facility and quaint
inventions, which heretofore have so ravished me, they can now a days scarcely entertaine
me. I speak my mind freely of all things, indeed, of such as perhaps exceed my
sufficiencie, and that no way I hold to be of my jurisdiction. What my conceit is of them is
told also to manifest the proportion of my insight, and not the measure of things. If at any
time I find my self distasted of Platoes Axiochus, as of a forceles work, due regard had
to such an Author, my judgement does nothing believe itself: It is not so foolhardy, or
self-conceited, as it durst dare to oppose itself against the authority of so many other
famous ancient judgements, which he reputeth his regents and masters, and with whom
he had rather erre. He chafeth with, and condemneth himself, either to rely on the
superficiall sense, being unable to pierce into the centre, or to view the thing by some
false lustre. He is pleased only to warrant himself from trouble and unruliness: As for
weaknesses he acknowledgeth and ingeniously avoweth the same. He thinks to give a just
interpretation to the apparences which his conception presents unto him, but they are
shallow and imperfect. Most of Aesopes fables have diverse senses, and severall
interpretations: Those which Mythologize them, chose some kind of colour well sutirig
with the fable; but for the most part, it is no other than the firsthand superficiall glosse:
There are others more quick, more siniaowie, more essentiall, and more internall, into
which they could never penetrate; and thus think I with them. But to follow my course, I
have ever deemed that in Poesie, Virgil, Lucretius, Catullus, and Horace, do doubtles by
far hold the first rank: and especially Virgil in his Georgiks, which I esteeme to be the
most accomplished peece of.work of Poesie: In comparison of which one may easily
discerne, that there are some passages in the Æneidos to which the Author (had he lived)
would no doubt have given some review or correction: The fifth book whereof is (in my
mind) the most absolutely perfect. I also love Lucan, and willingly read him, not so much
for his stile, as for his own worth and truth of his opinion and judgement. As for good
Terence, I allow the quaintness and grace of his Latine tongue, and judge him wonderful
conceited and apt, lively to represent the motions and passions of the mind, and the

condition of our manners: our actions make me often remember him. I can never read
him so often but still I discover some new grace and beautie in him. Those that lived about
Virgil’s time, complained that some would compare Lucretius unto him. I am of opinion
that verily it is an unequall comparison; yet can I hardly assure my seffe in this opinion
whensoever I find my self entangled in some notable passage of Lucretius. If they were
moved at this comparison, what would they say now of the foolish, hardy and barbarous
stupidity of those which now adayes compare Ariosto unto him? Nay, what would Ariosto
say of it himself?
O seclum insipiens et infacetum. Catul. Epig. xl. 8.
O age that has no wit,
And small conceit in it.
I think our ancestors had also more reason to cry out against those that blushed not to
equall Plautus unto Terence (who makes more show to be a Gentleman) than Lucretius
unto Virgil. This one thing does greatly advantage the estimation and preferring of
Terence, that the father of the Roman eloquence, of men of his quality does so often make
mention of him; and the censure which the chief Judge of the Roman Poets gives of his
companion. It has often come unto my mind, how such as in our dayes give themselves
to composing of comedies (as the Italians who are very happy in them) employ three or
foure arguments of Terence and Plautus to make up one of theirs. In one only comedy
they will huddle up five or six of Bocaces tales. That which makes them so to charge
themselves with matter, is the distrust they have of their own sufficiency, and that they
are not able to undergoe so heavy a burden with their own strength. They are forced to
find a body on which they may rely and leane themselves: and wanting matter of their
own wherewith to please us, they will have the story or tale to busie and ammuse us:
where as in my Authors it is cleane contrary: The elegancies, the perfections and
ornaments of his manner of speech, make us neglect and lose the longing for his subject.
His quaintness and grace do still retaine us to him. He is every where pleasantly
conceited,
Liquidus puroque simillimus amni, Hor. ii. Epist. ii. 120.
So clearely-neate, so neately-clear,
As he a fine-pure River were,
and does so replenish our mind with his graces that we forget those of the fable. The
same consideration draws me somewhat further. I perceive that good and ancient Poets
have shunned the affectation and enquest, not only of fantastic, new fangled,
Spagniolized and Petrarchisticall elevations, but also of more sweet and sparing
inventions, which are the ornament of all the Poeticall workes of succeeding ages. Yet is

there no competent Judge that findeth them wanting in those Ancient ones, and that does
not much more admire that smoothly equall neatnesse, continued sweetness, and
flourishing comelinesse of Catullus his Epigrams, than all the sharpe quips and witty girds
wherewith Martiall does whet and embellish the conclusions of his. It is the same reason I
spake of erewhile, as Martiall of himself. Minus illi ingenio laborandum fuit, in cuius
locum mate ria successerat: (Mart. præf. viii.) ’He needed the less work with his wit, in
place whereof matter came in supply.’ The former without being moved or pricked cause
themselves to be beard lowd enough: they have matter to laugh at every where, and need
not tickle themselves; where as these must have foraine helpe: according as they have
less spirit, they must have more body. They leape on horse-backe, because they are not
sufficiently strong in their legs to march on foot. Even as in our dances, those base
conditioned men that keep dancing schooles, because they are unfit to represent the port
and decencie of our nobility, endeavor to get commendation by dangerous lofty trickes,
and other strange tumbler-like friskes and motions. And some Ladies make a better show
of their countenances in those dances, wherein are diverse changes, cuttings, turnings, and
agitations of the body, than in some dances of state and gravity, where they need but
simply to tread a natural, measure, represent an unaffected cariage, and their ordinary
grace; And as I have also seen some excellent Lourdans, or Clownes, attired in their
ordinary workyday clothes, and with a common homely countenance, affoord us all the
pleasure that may be had from their art: but prentises and learners that are not of so high a
form, besmeare their faces, to disguise themselves, and in motions counterfeit strange
visages and antickes, to enduce us to laughter. This my conception is no where better
discerned than in the comparison betweene Virgils Æneidos and Orlando Furioso. The
first is seen to soare aloft with full-spread wings, and with so high and strong a pitch,
ever following his point; the other faintly to hover and flatter from tale to tale, and as it
were skipping from bough to bough, alwayes distrusting his own wings, except it be for
some short flight, and for fear his strength and breath should faile him, to sit down at
every fields-end.
Excursusque breves tentat. -- Virg. Æn. iv. 194.
Out-lopes sometimes he does assay,
But very short, and as he may.
See here then, concerning this kind of subjects, what Authors please me best: As for
my other lesson, which somewhat more mixeth profit with pleasure, whereby I learne to
range my opinions and addresse my conditions, the Bookes that serve me thereinto are
Plutarke (since he spake French) and Seneca, both have this excellent commodity for my
humor, that the knowledge I seek in them is there so scatteringly and loosely handled,
that whosoever readeth them is not tied to plod long upon them, whereof I am uncapable.
And so are Plutarkes little workes and Senecas Epistles, which are the best and most
profitable parts of their writings. It is no great matter to draw me to them, and I leave
them where I list. For they succeed not and depend not one of another. Both jumpe and

suit together, in most true and profitable opinions: And fortune brought them both into the
world in one age. Both were Tutors unto two Roman Emperours: Both were strangers, and
came from far Countries; both rich and mighty in the common-wealth, and in credit with
their masters. Their instruction is the prime and creame of Philosophy, and presented with
a plaine, unaffected, and pertinent fashion. Plutarke is more uniform and constant;
Seneca more waving and diverse. This does labor, force, and extend himself, to arm
and strengthen virtue against weaknesse fear, and vitious desires; the other seems
nothing so much to fear their force or attempt, and in a manner scorneth to hasten or
change his pace about them, and to put himself upon his guard. Plutarkes opinions are
Platonicall, gentle and accommodable unto civill societie: Senecæs Stoicall and Epicurian,
further from common use, but in my conceit more proper particular, and more solid. It
appeareth in Seneca that he somewhat inclineth and yieldeth to the tyrannie of the
Emperors which were in his days; for I verily believe, it is with a forced judgement he
condemneth the cause of those noblie-minded murtherers of Cæsar; Plutarke is every
where free and open hearted; Seneca fullfraught with points and sallies; Plutarke stuft
with matters. The former does move and enflame you more; the latter content, please, and
pay you better: This does guide you, the other drive you on. As for Cicero, of all his
works, those that treat of Philosophie (namely morall) are they which best serve my turn,
and square with my intent. But boldly to confess the truth (for, since the bars of
impudencie were broken down, all curbing is taken away), his manner of writing seems
very tedious unto me, as does all such like stuffe. For his prefaces, definitions, divisions,
and Etymologies consume the greatest part of his works; whatsoever quick, wittie, and
pithie conceit is in him is surcharged and confounded by those his long and far-fetcht
preambles. If I bestow but one hour in reading them, which is much for me, and let me
call to mind what substance or juice I have drawne from him, for the most part I find
nothing but wind and ostentation in him; for he is not yet come to the arguments which
make for his purpose, and reasons that concerne the knot or pith I seek after. These
Logicall and Aristotelian ordinances are not availfull for me who only endeavour to
become more wise and sufficient and not more wittie or eloquent. I would have one begin
with the last point; I understand sufficiently what death and voluptuousuesse are: let not a
man busie himself to anatomize them. At the first reading of a book I seek for good
and solid reasons that may instruct me how to sustain their assaults. It is neither
grammaticall subtilties or logicall quiddities, nor the wittie contexture of choice words or
arguments and syllogismes, that will serve my turn. I like those discourses that give the
first charge to the strongest part of the doubt; his are but flourishes, and languish
everywhere. They are good for schooles, at the barre, or for Orators and Preachers, where
we may slumber: and though we wake a quarter of an hour after, we may find and trace
him soone enough. Such a manner of speech is fit for those judges that a man would
corrupt by hooke or crooke, by right or wrong, or for children and the common people,
unto whom a man must tell all, and see what the event would be. I would not have a man
go about and labor by circumlocutions to induce and winne me to attention, and that (as
our Heralds or Criers do) they shall ring out their words: Now hear me, now listen, or ho-
yes. The Romanes in their religion were went to say, ’Hoc age;’ which in ours we say,

’Sursum corda.’ There are so many lost words for me. I come readie prepared from my
house. I neede no allurement nor sawce, my stomacke is good enough to digest raw meat:
And whereas with these preparatives and f lourishes, or preambles, they think to sharpen
my taste or stir my stomacke, they cloy and make it wallowish. Shall the privilege of
times excuse me from this sacrilegious boldness, to deem Platoes Dialogismes to be as
languishing, by overfilling and stuffing his matter? And to bewaile the time that a man
who had so many thousands of things to utter, spends about so many, so long, so vain,
and idle interlocutions, and preparatives? My ignorance shall better excuse me, in that I
see nothing in the beautie of his language. I generally enquire after bookes that use
sciences, and not after such as institute them. The two first, and Plinie, with others of their
rank, have no Hoc age in them, they will have to do with men that have forewarned
themselves; or if they have, it is a materiall and substantiall Hoc age, and that has his
body apart. I likewise love to read the Epistles and ad Atticum, not only because they
contains a most ample instruction of the historic and affairs of his times, but much more
because in them I descrie his private humors. For (as I have said elsewhere) I am
wonderful curious to discover and know the mind, the soul the genuine disposition and
natural judgement of my authors. A man ought to judge their sufficiencie and not their
customs, nor them by the show of their writings, which they set forth on this world’s
theatre. I have sorrowed a thousand times that ever we lost the book that Brutus wrote of
Vertue. Oh it is a goodly thing to learne the Theorike of such as understand the practice
well. But forasmuch as the Sermon is one thing and the Preacher another, I love as much
to see Brutus in Plutarke as in himself: I would rather make choice to know certainly what
talk he had in his tent with some of his familiar friends, the night fore-going the battle,
than the speech he made the morrow after to his Armie and what he did in his chamber or
closet, than what in the senate or market place. As for Cicero, I am of the common
judgement, that besides learning there was no exquisite eloquence in him: He was a good
citizen, of an honest, gentle nature, as are commonly fat and burly men: for so was he: But
to speak truly of him, full of ambitious vanity and remisse niceness. And I know not well
how to excuse him, in that be deemed his Poesie worthy to be published. It is no great
imperfection to make bad verses, but it is an imperfection in him that he never perceived
how unworthy they were of the glory of his name. Concerning his eloquence, it is beyond
all comparison, and I verily believe that none shall ever equall it. Cicero the younger,
who resembled his father in nothing but in name, commanding in Asia, chanced one day
to have many strangers at his board, and amongst others, one Cæstius sitting at the lower
end, as the manner is to thrust in at great mens tables: Cicero inquired of one of his men
what he was, who told him his name, but he dreaming on other matters, and having
forgotten what answere his man made him, asked him his name twice or thrice more: the
servant, because he would not be troubled to tell him one thing so often, and by some
circumstance to make him to know him better, ’It is,’ said he, ’the same Cæstius of whom
some have told you that, in respect of his own, maketh no accompt of your fathers
eloquence:’ Cicero being suddainly mooved, commanded the said Cæstius to be presently
taken from the table, and well whipped in his presence: See here an uncivill and barbarous
host. Even amongst those which (all things considered) have deemed his eloquence

matchlesse and incomparable, others there have been who have not spared to note some
faults in it. As great Brutus said, that it was an eloquence broken, halting, and disjoynted,
fractam et elumbem. ’Incoherent and sinnnowlesse.’ Those Orators that lived about his
age, reproved also in him the curious care he had of a certain long cadence at the end of
his clauses, and noted these words, esse videatur, which he so often useth. As for me, I
rather like a cadence that falleth shorter, cut like Iambikes: yet does he sometimes
confounde his numbers, but it is seldom: I have especially observed this one place; ’Ego
vero me minus diu senem esse mallem, quam esse senem, antequam essem: (Cic. De
Senect.) ’But I had rather not be an old man, so long as I might be, than to be old before I
should be.’ Historians are my right hand, for they are pleasant and e asie; and therewithall
the man with whom I desire generally to be acquainted may more lively and perfectly be
discovered in them than in any other composition: the varietie and truth of his inward
conditions, in grosse and by retale: the diversitie of the means of his collection and
composing, and of the accidents that threaten him. Now those that write of mens lives,
forasmuch as they ammuse and busie themselves more about counsels than events, more
about that which commeth from within than that which appeareth outward; they are fittest
for me: And that’s the reason why Plutarke above all in that kind does best please me.
Indeed I am not a little grieved that we have not a dozen of Lærtius, or that be is not more
known, or better understood; for I am no less curious to know the fortunes and lives of
these great masters of the world than to understand the diversitie of their decrees and
conceits. In this kind of studie of historie a man must, without distinction, tosse and turn
over all sorts of Authors, both old and new, both French and others, if he will learne the
things they so diversly treat of. But me thinkes that Cæsar above all does singularly
deserve to be studied, not only for the understanding of the historie as of himself; so
much perfection and excellencie is there in him more than in others, although Salust be
reckoned one of the number. Verily I read that author with a little more reverence and
respects than commonly men read profane and humane Workes: sometimes considering
him by his actions and wonders of his greatness, and other times waighing the puritie and
inimitable polishing and elegancie of his tongue, which (as Cicero says) has not only
exceeded all historians, but perhaps Cicero himself: with such sinceritie in his judgement,
speaking of his enemies, that except the false colours wherewith he goeth about to
cloakebis bad cause, and the corruption and filthinesse of his pestilent ambition, I am
persuaded there is nothing in him to be found fault with: and that he has been over-
sparing to speak of himself; for so many notable and great things could never be
executed by him, unless he bad put more of his own into them than be setteth down. I
love those Historians that are either very simple or most excellent. The simple who have
nothing of their own to adde unto the story and have but the care and diligence to collect
whatsoever come to their knowledge, and sincerely and faithfully to register all things,
without choice or culling, by the naked truth leave our judgment more entire and better
satisfied. Such amongst others (for examples sake) plaine and well-meaning Froissard,
who in his enterprise has marched with so free and genuine a puritie, that having
committed some oversight, he is neither ashamed to acknowledge nor afraid to correct the
same, wherever has either notice or warning of it: and who representeth unto us the

diversitie of the news then current and the diferent reports that were made unto him. The
subject of an historie should be naked, bare, and formelesse; each man according to his
capacitie or understanding may reap commoditie out of it. The curious and most excellent
have the sufficiencie to cull and chuse that which is worthie to be known and may select
of two relations that which is most likely: from the condition of Princes and of their
humors, they conclude their counsels and attribute fit words to them: they assume a just
authority and bind our faith to theirs. But truly that belongs not to many. Such as are
betweene both (which is the most common fashion), it is they that spoil all; they will
needs chew our meat for us and take upon them a law to judge, and by consequence to
square and encline the story according to their fantasie; for, where the judgement bendeth
one way, a man cannot chose but wrest and turn his narration that way. They undertake
to chuse things worthy to be known, and now and then conceal either a word or a secret
action from us, which would much better instruct us: omitting such things as they
understand not as incredible: and perhaps such matters as they know not how to declare
either in good Latin or tolerable French. Let them boldly enstall their eloquence and
discourse: Let them censure at their pleasure, but let them also give us leave to judge after
them: And let them neither alter nor dispense by their abridgements and choice anything
belonging to the substance of the matter; but let them rather send it pure and entire with all
her dimensions unto us. Most commonly (as chiefly in our age) this charge of writing
histories is committed unto base, ignorant, and mechanicall kind of people, only for this
consideration that they can speak well; as if we sought to learne the Grammer of them;
and they have some reason, being only hired to that end, and publishing nothing but their
tittle-tattle to aime at nothing else so much. Thus with store of choice and quaint words,
and wyre drawne phrases, they huddle up and make a hodge-pot of a laboured contexture
of the reports which they gather in the market places or such other assemblies. The only
good histories are those that are written by such as commanded or were imploied
themselves in weighty affairs or that were partners in the conduct of them, or that at least
have had the fortune to manage others of like quality. Such in a manner are all the
Græcians and Romans. For many eyewitness having written of one same subject it hapned
in those times when Greatnesse and Knowledge did commonly meet) if any fault or
oversight have past them, it must be deemed exceeding light and upon some doubtfull
accident. What may a man expect at a Phisitians hand that discourseth of war, or of a
bare Scholler treating of Princes secret designes? If we shall but note the religion which
the Romans had in that, we need no other example: Asinus Pollio found some mistaking
or or oversight in Cæsars Commentaries, whereinto he was faine, only because he could
not possiblie oversee all things with his own eyes that hapned in his Armie, but was faine
to rely on the reports of particular men, who often related untruths unto him; or else
because he had not been curiously advertised and distinctly enformed by his Lieutenants
and Captains of such matters as they in his absence had managed or affected. Whereby
may be seen that nothing is so hard or so uncertaine to be found out as the certaintie of
the truth, sithence no man can put any assured confidence concerning the truth of a battle,
neither in the knowledge of him that was General or commanded over it, nor in the
soldiers that fought, of anything that has hapned amongst them; except after the manner

of a strict point of law, the severall witnesses are brought and examined face to face, and
that all matters be nicely and thorowly sifted by the objects and trials of the success of
every accident. Verily the knowledge we have of our own affairs is much more barren
and feeble. But this has sufficiently been handled by Bodin, and agreeing with my
conception. Somewhat to aid the weaknesse of my memory and to assist her great defects;
for it has often been my chance to light upon bookes which I supposed to be new and
never to have read, which I had not understanding diligently read and ran over many years
before, and all bescribled with my notes: I have a while since accustomed my self to note
at the end of my book (I meane such as I purpose to read but once) the time I made an
end to read it, and to set down what censure or judgement I gave of it; that so it may at
least at another time represent unto my mind the aire and general idea I had conceived of
the author in reading him. I will here set down the Copie of some of my annotations, and
especially what I noted upon my Guicciardine about ten years since (For what language
soever my books speak unto me I speak unto them in my own.) He is a diligent
Historiographer and from whom in my conceit a man may as exactly learne the truth of
such affairs as passed in his time, as of any other writer whatsoever and the rather
because himself has been an Actor of most part of them and in very honorable place.
There is no signe or apparance that ever he disguised or coloured any matter, either
through hatred, malice, favor, or vanity; whereof the free and impartiall judgements he
gives of great men, and namely of those by whom he had been advanced or employed in
his important charges, as of Pope Clement the seaventh, beareth undoubted testimony.
Concerning the parts wherein be most goeth about to prevaile, which are his digressions
and discourses, many of them are very excellent and enriched with fair ornaments, but
he has too much pleased himself in them: for endeavouring to omit nothing that might
be spoken, having so full and large a subject, and almost infinite, he proveth somewhat
languishing, and gives a taste of a kind of scholasticall tedious babling. Moreover, I have
noted this, that of so severall and diverse arms, successes, and effects he judgeth of; of so
many and variable motives, alterations, and counsels, that be relateth, he never referreth
any one unto virtue, religion, or conscience as if they were all extinguished and banished
the world: and of all actions how glorious soever in apparance they be of themselves, he
does ever impute the cause of them to some vicious and blame-worthie occasion, or to
some commoditie and profit. It is impossible to imagine that amongst so infinite a number
of actions whereof he judgeth, some one have not been produced and compassed by way
of reason. No corruption could ever possesse men so universally but that some one must
of necessity escape the contagion; which makes me to fear he has had some distaste or
blame in his passion, and it has perhaps fortuned that he has judged or esteemed of others
according to himself. In my Philip de Comines there is this: In him you shall find a
pleasing-sweet and gently-gliding speech, fraught with a purely sincere simplicitie, his
narration pure and unaffected, and wherein the Authours unspotted good meaning does
evidently appeare, void of all manner of vanity or ostentation speaking of himself, and
free from all afection or envie-speaking of others; his discourses and persuasions
accompanied more with a well-meaning zeale and meere veritie than with any laboured
and exquisite sufficiencie, and allthrough with gravitie and authority, representing a man

well-borne and brought up in high negotiations. Upon the menioires and historie of
Monsieur du Bellay. It is ever a well-pleasing thing to see matters written by those that
have assaid how and in what manner they ought to be directed and managed: yet can it not
be denied but that in both these Lords there will manifestly appeare a great declination
from a free liberty of writing, which clearely shineth in ancient writers of their kind: as in
the Lord of Jonville, familiar unto Saint Lewis; Eginard, Chancellor unto Charlemaine;
and of more fresh memory in Philip de Comines. This is rather a declamation or pleading
for king Francis against the Emperor Charles the fifth, than an Historie. I will not
believe they have altered or changed any thing concerning the generalitie of matters, but
rather to wrest and turn the judgement of the events many times against reason, to our
advantage, and to omit whatsoever they supposed to be doubtful or ticklish in their
masters life: they have made a business of it: witness the recoylings of the Lords of
Momorancy and Byron, which therein are forgotten; and which is more, you shall not so
much as find the name of the Lady of Estampes mentioned at all. A man may sometimes
colour and perhaps hide secret actions, but absolutely to conceal that which all the world
knows, and especially such things as have drawne-on public effects, and of such
consequence, it is an inexcusable defect, or as I may say unpardonable oversight. To
conclude, whosoever desires to have perfect information and knowledge of king Francis
the first, and of the things hapned in his time, let him addresse himself elsewhere if he
will give any credit unto me. The profit he may reap here is by the particular description
of the battles and exploits of war wherein these gentlemen were present; some privie
conferences, speeches, or secret actions of some princes that then lived, and the practices
managed, or negotiations directed by the Lord of Langeay, in which doubtless are very
many things well worthy to be known, and diverse discourses not vulgare.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XI: OF CRUELTIE






CHAPTER XI: OF CRUELTIE
ETHINKS Virtue is another manner of thing, and much more noble
than the inclinations unto Goodnesse, which in us are engendered.
Mindes wellborne, and directed by themselves, follow one same path,
and in their actions represent the same visage that the vertuous do. But
Vertue importeth and soundeth somewhat I wot not what greater and
more active than by an happy complexion, gently and peaceably, to
suffer itself to be led or drawne to follow reason. He that through a
natural facilitie and genuine mildness should neglect or contemne injuries received,
should no doubt performe a rare action, and worthy commendation: but he who being
touched and stung lo the quick with any wrong or offence received, should arm himself
with reason against this furiously blind desire of revenge, and in the end after a great
conflict yield himself master over it, should doubtlesse do much more. The first should
do well, the other vertuously: the one action might be termed Goodnesse, the other
Vertue. For it seems that the very name of Vertue presupposeth difficulties and inferreth
resistance, and cannot well exercise itself without an enemy. It is perhaps the

reason why we call God good, mightie, liberall, and just, but we term him not vertuous.
His workes are all voluntarie, unforced, and without compulsion. Of Philosophers, not
only Stoics, but also Epicureans (which phrasing I borrow of the common received
opinion, which is false, whatsoever the nimble saying or wittie quipping of Arcesilaus
implied, who answered the man that upbraided him, how diverse men went from his
schoole to the Epicureans, but no one came from thence to him: I easily believe it (said
he) for Of cocks are many capons made, but no man could ever make a cock of a capon.
For truly in constancy opinion and strictnesse of precepts, the Epicurean sect does in no
sort yield to the Stoice. And a Stoike acknowledging a better faith than those disputers
who, to contend with Epicurus and make sport with him, make him to infer and say what
he never meant, wresting and wyre-drawing his words to a contrary sense, arguing and
silogizing, by the grammarians privilege, another meaning, by the manner of his speech
and another opinion than that they knew he had either in his mind or manners, says that
he left to be an Epicurean for this one consideration amongst others, that he findeth their
pitch to be over high and inaccessible: Et φιλοχαλοι vocantur, sunt φιλοχανοι
et φιλοιχαιοι omnesque virtutes et colunt et retinent: (Sen. Epist. xiii.) ’And those that are
called lovers of pleasures, are lovers of honestie and justice, and do reverence and
retaine all sorts of virtue.’ Of Stoice and Epicurean Philosophers, I say, there are diverse
who have judged that it was not sufficient to have the mind well placed, well ordered,
and well disposed unto virtue; it was not enough to have our resolutions and discourse
beyond all the affronts and checks of fortune; but that, moreover, it was very requisite to
seek for occasions whereby a man might come to the trial of it. They will diligently
quest and seek out for pain, smart, necessitie, want, and contempt, that so they may
combat them, and keep their mind in breath: Multum sibi adjicit virtus lacessitæ:
’Vertue provoked addes much to itself.’ It is one of the reasons why Epaminondas (who
was of a third sect) by a very lawfull way refuseth some riches fortune had put into his
hands, to the end (as he says) he might have cause to strive and resist povertie, in which
want and extremity he ever continued after. Socrates did in my mind more undauntedly
enure himself to this humor, maintaining for his exercise the peevish frowardnesse of his
wife, than which no essay can be more vexfull, and is a continuall fighting at the sharpe.
Metellus of all the Roman senators he only having undertaken with the power of virtue,
to endure the violence of Saturninus Tribune of the people in Rome, who by main force
went about to have a most unjust law pass in favor of the Communaltie: by which
opposition, having incurred all the capital paines that Saturninus had imposed on such as
should refuse it, entertained those that led him to the place of execution, with such
speeches: That to do evil was a thing very easy, and too demissely base, and to do
well where was no danger, was a common thing, but to do well where was both perill
and opposition, was the peculiar office of a man of virtue. These words of Metellus do
clearly represent unto us what I would have verified ; which is, that virtue rejects
facilitie to be her companion: And that an easefull, pleasant, and declining way by which
the regular steps of a good inclination of nature are directed is not the way of true virtue.
She requireth a craggie, rough, and thornie way. She would either have strange difficulties
to wrestle withall (as that of Metellus) by whose means fortune herself is pleased to

breake the roughnesse of his course; or such inward incombrances as the disordinate
appetites and imperfections of our condition bring unto her. Hitherto I have come at good
ease; but at the end of this discourse one thing commeth into my mind, which is that the
soul of Socrates, which is absolute the perfectest that ever came to my knowledge,
would, according to my accompt, prove a soul deserving but little commendation: For I
can conceive no manner of violence or vicious concupiscence in him: I can imagine no
manner of difficultie or compulsion in the whole course of his virtue. I know his reason so
powerfull, and so absolute mistress over him, that she can never give him way in any
vicious desire, and will not suffer it so much as to breed in him. To a virtue so exquisite
and so high raised as his is, I can persuade nothing. Me thinks I see it march with a
victorious and triumphant pace, in pompe and at ease, without let or disturbance. If virtue
cannot shine but by resisting contrary appetites, shall we then say it cannot pass without
the assistance of vice, and oweth him this, that by his means it attaineth to honor and
credit? What should also betide of that glorious and generous Epicurean voluptuousness
that makes accompt effeminately to pamper virtue in her lap, and there wantonly to
entertaine it, allowing it for her recreation, shame, reproch, agues, povertie, death, and
tortures? if I presuppose that perfect virtue is known by combating sorrow and patiently
under going pain, by tolerating the fits and agonies of the gout, without stirring out of his
place; if for a necessarie object I appoint her sharpnesse and difficultie, what shall become
of that virtue which has attained so high a degree, as it does not only despise all manner
of pain, but rather rejoyceth at it, and when a strong fit of the collike shall assaile it, to
cause itself to be tickled, as that is which the Epicureans have established, and whereof
diverse amongst them have by their actions left most certain proofes unto us? As also
others have, whom ill effect find to have exceeded the very rules of their discipline;
witness Cato the younger; when I see him die, tearing and mangling his entrails, I cannot
simply content my self to believe that at that time he had his soul wholly exempted
from all trouble or free from vexation: I cannot imagine be did only maintaine himself in
this march or course which the rule of the Stoike sect had ordained unto him, setled,
without alteration or emotion, and impassible. There was, in my conceit, in this mans
virtue overmuch cheerefulnesse and youthfulnesse to stay there. I verily believe he felt a
kind of pleasure and sensualitie in so noble an action, and that therein he more pleased
himself than in any other he ever performed in his life. Sic abiit e vita, ut causam moriendi
nactum se esse gauderet: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. i.) ’So departed he his life, that he rejoiced to
have found an occasion of death.’ I do so constantly believe it, that I make a doubt
whether he would have had the occasion of so noble an exploit taken from him. And if the
goodnesse which induced him to embrace public commodities more than his own did
not bridle me, I should easily fall into this opinion, that he thought himself greatly
beholding unto fortune to have put his virtue unto so noble a trial, and to have favoured
that robber to tread the ancient liberty of his countrie under foot. In which action me
thinks I read a kind of unspeakable joy in his mind, and a motion of extraordinary
pleasure, joined to a manlike voluptuousness, at what time it beheld the worthinesse, and
considered the generositie and haughtinesse of his enterprise,

Deliberata morte ferocior -- Hor. i. Od. xxxvii. 29. Cleopatra.
Then most in fiercenesse did he pass,
When he of death resolved was,
not urged or set-on by any hope of glory, as the popular and effeminate judgements have
judged: For, that consideration is over base, to touch so generous, so haughtie, and so
constant a heart; but for the beautie of the thing itself, which he, who managed all the
springs and directed all the wards thereof, saw much more clearer, and in its perfection,
than we can do. Philosophie has done me a pleasure to judge that so honorable an action
had been undecently placed in any other life than in Catoes, and that only unto his it
appertained to make such an end. Therefore did he with reason persuade both his son
and the Senators that accompanied him, to provide otherwise for themselves. Catoni quum
incredibilem natura tribuisset gravitatem, eamque ipse perpetua constantia roboravisset,
semperque in proposito consilio permansisset: mortendum potius quam tyranni vultus
aspiciendus erat: ’Whereas nature had affoorded Cato an incredible gravitie, and he had
strengthened it by continuall constancy, and ever had stood firme in his proposed
desseignes, rather to die than behold the Tyrants face. ’ Each death should be such as the
life has been. By dying we become no other than we were. I ever interpret a mans death
by his life. And if a man shall tell me of any one undanted in apparance, joined unto a
weake life; I imagine it to proceed of some weake cause, and suitable to his life. The ease
therefore of his death, and the facilitie he had acquired by the vigor of his mind, shall we
say, it ought to abate something of the lustre of his virtue? And which of those that have
their spirits touched, be it never so little, with the true tincture of Philosophie, can content
himself to imagine Socrates, only, free from fear and passion, in the accident of his
imprisonment, of his fetters, and of his condemnation? And who does not perceive in him,
not only constancy and resolution (which were ever his ordinary qualities) but also a
kind of I wot not what new contentment, and carelesse rejoycing in his last behaviour,
and discourses? By the startling at the pleasure, which he feeleth in clawing of his legs,
after his fetters were taken-off; does he not manifestly declare an equal glee and joy in his
soul for being rid of his former incommodities, and entering into the knowledge of things
to come? Cato shall pardon me (if he please) his death is more tragical, and further
extended, whereas this in a certain manner is more fair and glorious. Aristippus
answered those that bewailed the same, ’When I die, I pray the Gods send me such a
death.’ A man shall plainly perceive in the minds of these two men, and of such as imitate
them (for I make a question whether ever they could be matched) so perfect an habitude
unto virtue, that it was even converted into their complexion. It is no longer a painefull
virtue, nor by the ordinances of reason, for the maintaining of which their mind must be
strengthened: It is the very essence of their soul; it is her natural and ordinary habit.
They have made it such, by a long exercise and observing the rules and precepts of
Philosophic, having lighted upon a fair and rich nature. Those vicious passions which
breed in us find no entrance in them. The vigor and constancy of their soules, does
suppresse and extinguish all manner of concupiscences so soone as they but begin to

move. Now that it be not more glorious, by an undaunted and divine resolution, to hinder
the growth of temptations, and for a man to frame himself to virtue, so that the very
seeds of vice be cleane rooted out; than by mayne force to hinder their progresse; and
having suffred himself to be surprised by the first assaults of passions, to arm and
bandie himself, to stay their course and to suppresse them: And that this second effect be
not also much fairer than to be simply stored with a facile and gentle nature, and of itself
distasted and in dislike with licentiousnesse and vice, I am persuaded there is no doubt.
For this third and last manner seems in some sort to make a man innocent, but not
vertuous: free from doing ill, but not sufficiently apt to do well. Seeing this condition is
so near unto imperfection and weaknesses that I know not well how to clear their
confines and distinctions. The very names of goodnesse and innocencie, are for this
respect in some sort names of contempt. I see that many vertues, as chastitie, sobrietie,
and temperance, may come unto us by means of corporall defects and imbecilities.
Constancie in dangers (if it may be termed constancy) contempt of death, patiencie in
misfortunes, may happen and are often seen in men, for want of good judgeent in such
accidents, and that they are not apprehended for such as they are indeed. Lacke of
apprehension and stupidity counterfeit vertuous effects. As I have often seen come to
pass, that some men are commended for things they rather deserve to be blamed. An
Italian gentleman did once hold this position in my presence, to the prejudice and
disadvantage of his nation; That the subtiltie of the Italians, and the vivacitie of their
conceptions was so great that they foresaw such dangers and accidents as might betide
them so far-off that it was not to be deemed strange if in times of war they were often
seen to provide for their safetie, indeed, before they had perceived the danger: That we and
the Spaniards, who were not so warie and subtill, went further; and that before we could
be frighted with any perill, we must be induced to see it with our eyes, and feel it with our
hands, and that even then we had no more hold: But that the Germanes and Switzers, more
shallow and leaden-headed, had scarce the sense and wit to re-advise themselves, at what
times they were even overwhelmed with misery, and the axe readie to fall on their heads.
It was perhaps but in jest that he spake it, yet is it most true that in the art of war-
fare new trained souldlers, and such as are but novices in the trade, do often headlong
and hand over head cast themselves into dangers, with more inconsideration than
afterward when they have seen and endured the first shocks, and are better trained in the
schoole of perils.
------ haud iqnarus, quantum nova gloria in armis,
Et prædulce decus primo certamine possit.
Not ignorant, how much in arms new praise,
And sweetest honor, in first conflict weighes.
See here the reason why when we judge of a particular action, we must first consider
many circumstances, and throughly observe the man, that has produced the same before
we name and censure it. But to speak a word of my self: I have sometimes noted my

friends to terme that wisdom in me which was but meere fortune, and to deem that
advantage of courage and patience that was advantage of judgement and opinion; and to
attribute one title for another unto me, sometimes to my profit, and now and then to my
loss. As for the rest, I am far from attaining unto that chief and most perfect degree of
excellences, where a habitude is made of virtue, that even of the second I have made no
great trial. I have not greatly strived to bridle the desires wherewith I have found my self
urged and pressed. My virtue is a virtue, or to say better innocencie, accidentall and
casual. Had I been borne with a less regular complexion, I imagine my state had been
very pitiful, and it would have gon hard with me: for, I could never perceive any great
constancy in my soul, to resist and undergoe passions, had they been any thing violent. I
cannot foster quarels, or endure contentions in my house. So am I not greatly beholding
unto my self, in that I am exempted from many vices:
------- si vitiis mediocribus, et mea paucis
Mendosa est natura, alioqui recta, velut si
Egregio inspersos reprehendas corpore nævos. -- Hor. i. Sat. vi. 65.
If in a few more faults my nature faile,
Right otherwise: as if that you would rail
On prettie moles well placed,
On body seemely graced.
I am more endebted to my fortune than to my reason for it: Shee has made me to be
borne of a race famous for integritie and honestie, and of a very good father. I wot not
well whether any part of his humors have descended into me, or whether the domestike
examples and good institution of my infancie have insensibly set their helping hand unto
it; or whether I were otherwise so borne:
Seu Libra, seu me Scorpius aspicit
Formidolosus, pars violentior
Natalis horæ, seu tyrannus
Hesperiæ Capricornus undæ -- Hor. ii. Od. xvii. 17.
Whether the chief part of my birth-hour were
Ascendent Libra, or Scorpius full of fear,
Or in my Horoscope were Capricorne,
Whose tyrannie near westerne seas is borne:
But so it is, that naturally of my self I abhorre and detest all manner of vices. The
answer of Antisthenes to one that demanded of him which was the best thing to be
learned; To unlearne evil, seemed to be fixed on this image, or to have an ayme at this. I
abhorre them (I say) with so natural and so innated an opinion, that the very same instinct

and impression which I suckt from my nurse, I have so kept that no occasions could ever
make me alter the same: no, not my own discourses, which, because they have been
somewhat lavish in noting or taxing something of the common course, could easily induce
me to some actions which this my natural inclination makes me to hate. I will tell you a
wonder, I will tell it you indeed: I thereby find in many things more stay and order in my
manners than in my opinion: and my concupiscence less debauched than my reason.
Aristippus established certain opinions so bold, in favor of voluptuousness and riches,
that he made all Philosophie to mutiny against him. But concerning his manners,
Dionysius the tyrant, having presented him with three fair young wenches, that he might
chuse the fairest, he answered he would chuse them all three, and that Paris had very ill
successes forasmuch as he had preferred one above her fellowes. But they being brought
to his own house, he sent them backe again, without tasting them. His servant one day
carrying store of money after him, and being so overcharged with the weight of it that he
complained, his master commanded him to cast so much thereof away as troubled him.
And Epicurus, whose positions are irreligious and delicate, demeaned himself in his life
very laboriously and devoutly. He wrote to a friend of his, that he lived but with browne
bread and water, and entreated him to send him a piece of cheese, against the time he was
to make a solemn feast. May it be true, that to be perfectly good we must be so by an
hidden, natural, and universall proprietie, without law, reason, and example? The
disorders and excesses wherein I have found my self engaged are not (God be thanked)
of the worst. I have rejected and condemned them in my self, according to their worth;
for my judgement was never found to be infected by them. And on the other side, I accuse
them more rigorously in my self than in another. But that is all: as for the rest, I applie
but little resistance unto them, and suffer my self over-easily to encline to the other side
of the balance, except it be to order and empeach them from being commixt with others,
which (if a man take not good heed unto himself) for the most part entertaine and
enterchaine themselves the one with the other. As for mine, I have, as much as it has
laine in my power, abridged them, and kept them as single and as alone as I could:
------nec ultra,
Errorem foveo -- Juven. Sat. viii. 164.
Nor do I cherish any more,
The error which I bred before.
For, as touching the Stoics opinion, who say, that when the wise man worketh, he
worketh with all his vertues together; howbeit, according to the nature of the action, there
be one more apparent than other (to which purpose the similitude of mans body might, in
some sort, serve their turn; for the action of choler cannot exercise itself, except all the
humors set-to their helping hand, although choler be predominant) if thence they will
draw a like consequence, that when the offender trespasseth, he does it with all the vices
together, I do not so easily believe them, or else I understand them not: for, in effect, I
feel the contrary. They are sharpe-wittie subtilties, and without substance, about which

Philosophie does often busie itself. Some vices I shun; but othersome I eschew as much
as any saint can do. The Peripatetikes do also disavow this connexitie and indissoluble
knitting together. And Aristotle is of opinion, That a wise and just man may be both
intemperate and incontinent. Socrates avowed unto them, who in his phisiognomie
perceived some inclination unto vice, that indeed it was his natural propension, but that
by discipline he had corrected the same. And the familiar friends of the Philosopher Stilpo
were went to say, that being borne subject unto wine and women, he had, by studie,
brought himself to abstaine from both. On the other side; what good I have, I have it by
the lot of my birth: I have it neither by law nor prescription, nor by any apprentiship. The
innocencie that is in me is a kind of simple- plaine innocencie, without vigor or art.
Amongst all other vices, there is none I hate more than Crueltie, both by nature and
judgement, as the extremest of all vices. But it is with such an yearning and faint-
hartednesse, that if I see but a chickins necke puld off, or a pigge stickt, I cannot chuse but
grieve, and I cannot well endure a seelie dewbedabled hare to groan when she is seized
upon by the houndes, although hunting be a violent pleasure. Those that are to withstand
voluptuousness do willingly use this argument, to show it is altogether vicious and
unreasonable: That where she is in her greatest prime and chief strength, she does so over-
sway us, that reason can have no accesse unto us, and for a further trial, alleage the
experience we feel and have of it in our acquaintance with women.
-----cum iam præsagit gaudia corpus
Atque in eo est Venus, ut muliebria conserat arva. -- Lucr. iv. 1097.
When now the body does light-joyes fore-know,
And Venus set the womans fields to sow.
Where they think pleasure does so far transport us beyond ourselves, that our
discourse, then altogether overwhelmed, and our reason wholie ravished in the gulfe of
sensualitie, cannot by any means discharge her function. I know it may be otherwise: and
if a man but please, he may sometimes, even upon the very instant cast his mind on other
conceits. But she must be strained to a higher key, and heedfully pursued. I know a man
may gourmandize the earnest and thoughtconfounding violence of that pleasure: for I may
with some experience speak of it, and I have not found Venus to be so imperious a
Goddesse as many, and more reformed than my self, witness her to be. I think it not a
wonder, as does the Queene of Navarre, in one of the tales of her Heptameron (which,
respecting the subject it treateth of, is a very prettie book) nor do I deem it a matter of
extreme difficultie for a man to weare out a whole night, in all opportunity and liberty,
in companie of a fair mistresses long time before sued-unto, and by him desired;
religiously keeping his word, if he have engaged himself, to be contented with simple
kisses and plaine touching. I am of opinion that the example of the sport in hunting would
more fit the same: wherein as there is less pleasure, so there is more distraction and
surprising, whereby our reason being amazed, looseth the leisure to prepare herself
against it: when as after a long game, the beast does suddenly start, or rowse up before us,

and perhaps in such a place where we least expected the same. That suddaine motion and the
earnestnesse of showting, jubeting and hallowing, still ringing in our ears, would make it
very hard for those who love that kind of close or chamber-hunting, at that very instant,
to withdraw their thoughts elsewhere. And poets make Diana victoriously to triumph both
over the firebrand and arrows of Cupid.
Quis non malarum quas amor curas habet
Hæc inter obliviscitur? -- Hor. Epod. ii. 37.
While this is doing, who does not forget
The wicked cares wherewith Love’s heart does fret?
But to return to my former discourse, I have a very feeling and tender compassion of
other mens afflictions, and should more easily weep for companie sake, if possible for any
occasion whatsoever I could shed tears. There is nothing sooner moveth tears in me than
to see others weepe, not only fainedly, but however, whether truly or forcedly. I do not
greatly waile for the dead, but rather envie them. Yet do I much waile and moan the
dying. The canibales and savage people do not so much offend me with roasting and
eating of dead bodies; as those which torment and persecute the living. Let any man be
executed by law, how deservedly soever, I cannot endure to behold the execution with an
unrelenting eye. Some one going about to witness the clemencie of Julius Cæsar; ’He
was,’ says he, ’tractable and mild in matters of revenge. Having compelled the pirates to
yield themselves unto him, who had before taken him prisoner and put him to ransome,
forasmuch as he had threatned to have them all crucified, he condemned them to that kind
of death, but it was after he had caused them to be strangled.’ Philemon his secretarie, who
would have poysoned him, had no sharper punishment of him than an ordinary death.
Without mentioning the Latin Author, who for a testimony of clemencie, dared to alleage
the only killing of those by whom a man has been offended, it may easily be guessed
that he is tainted with vile and horrible examples of cruelties such as Roman Tyrants
brought into fashion. As for me, even in matters of justice, whatsoever is beyond a simple
death, I deem it to be meere crueltie: and especiall amongst us, who ought to have a
regardfull respect that their soules should be sent to heaven, which cannot be, having first
by intolerable tortures agitated, and as it were brought them to despair. A souldier, not
long since, being a prisoner, and perceiving from a loft a tower, where he was kept, that
store of people flocked together on a greene, and carpenters were busie at work to erect a
skaffold, suppposing the same to be for him, as one desperat, resolved to kill himself, and
searching up and down for something to make himself away, found nothing but an old
rustie cart-naile, which fortune presented him with; he took it, and therewithall, with all
the strength he had, strooke and wounded himself twice in the throat, but seeing it would
not rid him of life, he then thrust it into his bellie up to the head, where he left it fast-
sticking. Shortly after, one of his keepers coming in unto him, and yet living, finding him
in that miserable plight, but weltring in his goare-blood and readie to gasp his last, told
the Magistrates of it, which, to prevent time before he should die, hastned to pronounce

sentence against him: which when he heard, and that he was only condemned to have his
head cut off, he seemed to take heart of grace again, and to be sorie for what be had
done, and took some comfortable drinks, which before be had refused, greatly thanking
the Judges for his unhoped gentle condemnation: And told them, that for fear of a more,
sharply-cruel, and intolerable death by law, he had resolved to prevent it by some violent
manner of death, having by the preparations he had seen the carpenters make, and by
gathering of people together, conceived an opinion that they would torture him with some
horrible torment, and seemed to be delivered from death only by the change of it. Were I
worthie to give counsell, I would have these examples of rigor, by which superior powers
go about to keep the common people in awe, to be only exercised on the bodies of
criminall malefactors: For, to see them deprived of Christian burial, to see them hauled,
disbowelled, parboyled, and quartered, might perhaps touch the common sort as much as the
paines they make the living to endure: howbeit in effect it be little or nothing, as says
God, Qui corpus occidunt, et postea non habent quod faciant. (Luke xii. 4.) ’Those that
kill the body’, but have afterwards no more to do:’ And Poets make the horror of this
picture greatly to prevaile, indeed, and above death.
Heu reliquias semiassi Regis, denudatis ossibus,
Per terram sanie delibutas foede divexarier. -- Cic. Tusc. Qu. i.
O that the reliques of an halfe burnt King, bones bared,
On earth besmear’d with filth, should be so fouly marred.
It was my fortune to be at Rome upon a day that one Catena, a notorious high-way
theefe, was executed: at his strangling no man of the companie seemed to be mooved to
any ruth; but when he came to be quartered, the Executioner gave no blow that was not
accompanied with a piteous voice and hartie exclamation, as if every man had had a
feeling sympathie, or lent his senses to the poor mangled wretch. Such inhumane outrages
and barbarous excesses should be exercised against the rinde, and not practised against the
quick. In a case somewhat like unto this, did Artaxerxes assuage and mitigate the
sharpnesse of the ancient laws of Persia, appointing that the Lords which had trespassed
in their estate, whereas they were wont to be whipped, they should be stripped naked, and
their clothes whipped for them; and where they were accustomed to have their hair
pulled off, they should only have their hat taken off. The Egyptians, so devout and
religious, thought they did sufficiently satisfie divine Justice, in sacrificing painted and
counterfeit hogges unto it: An over-hardy invention to go about with pictures and
shadowes to appease God, a substance so essentiall and divine. I live in an age wherein we
abound with incredible examples of this vice, through the licentiousnesse of our civill and
intestine wars: and read all ancient stories, be they never so tragical, you shall find none
to equall those we daily see practised. But that has nothing made me acquainted with it. I
could hardly be persuaded before I had seen it, that the world could have afforded so
marble-hearted and savage- minded men, that for the only pleasure of murther would
commit it; then cut, mangle, and hacke other members in pieces to rouze and sharpen their

wits, to invent unused tortures and unheard-of torments: to devise new and unknown
deaths, and that in cold blood, without any former enmitie or quarrell, or without any
gain or profit; and only to this end, that they may enjoy the pleasing spectacle of the
languishing gestures, pitifull notions, horror-moving yellings, deep fetcht groanes, and
lamentable voyces of a dying and drooping man. For that is the extremest point whereunto
the crueltie of man may attaine. Ut homo hominem, non iratus, non timens, tantum
spectaturus occidat; (Sen. Clem. ii. c. 4.) ’That one man should kill another, neither being
angrie nor afeard, but only to looke on.’ As for me, I could never so much as endure,
without remorse or grief, to see a poore, sillie, and innocent beast pursued and killed,
which is harmlesse and void of defense, and of whom we receive no offence at all. And as
it commonly happens, that when the Stag begins to be embost, and finds his strength to
faile him, having no other remedie left him, does yield and bequeath himself unto us that
pursue him, with tears suing to us for mercy:
------ questuque cruentus
Atque imploranti similis: -- Virg. Æn. vii. 521.
With blood from throat, and tears from eyes,
It seems that he for pittie cryes:
was ever a grievous spectacle unto me. I seldom take any beast alive but I give him his
liberty. Pythagoras was wont to buy fishes of fishers, and birds of fowlers to set them
free again.
----- primoque a cæde ferarum
Incaluisse puto maculatum sanguine ferrum. -- Ovid. Metam. xv. 106.
And first our blades in blood embrude deem
With slaughter of poore beasts did reeking steeme.
Such as by nature show themselves bloody-minded towards harmlesse beasts, witness
a natural propension unto crueltie. After the ancient Romanes had once enured
themselves without horror to behold the slaughter of wild beasts in their shewes, they
came to the murther of men and Gladiators. Nature (I fear me) has of her own self
added unto man a certain instinct to inhumanitie. No man taketh delight to see wild
beasts sport and wantonly to make much one of another: Yet all are pleased to see them
tugge, mangle, and enterteare one another. And lest any body should jeast at this
sympathie, which I have with them, Divinitie itself wills us to show them some favor:
And considering that one self-same master (I mean that incomprehensible worlds-framer)
has placed all creatures in this his wondrous palace for his service, and that they, as well
as we, are of his household: I say it has some reason to injoyne us to show some respect
and affection towards them. Pythagoras borrowed Metempsychosis of the Egyptians, but

since it has been received of diverse Nations, and especially of our Druides:
Morte carent animæ, semperique priore relicta
Sede, novis domibus vivunt, habitantque receptæ. -- 158.
Our death-less soules, their former seats refrained,
In harbors new live and lodge entertained.
The Religion of our ancient Gaules inferred, that soules being eternall, ceased not to
remove and change place from one body to another: to which fantasie was also
entermixed some consideration of divine justice. For, according to the soules behaviors,
during the time she had been with Alexander, they sayd that God appointed it another
body to dwell in either more or less painfull, and suitable to her condition.
----- muta ferarum
Cogit vincla pati truculentos ingerit ursis,
Prædonesque lupis, fallaces vilpibus addit.
Atque per varios annos per mille figuras
Egit, letheo purgatos flumine tandem
Rursus ad humanæ revocat primordia formæ. -- Claud. in Ruff. i. 482, 491.
Dumbe hands of beasts he makes men’s soules endure,
Blood-thirstie soules he does to Beares enure,
Craftie to Foxes, to Woolves bent to rapes;
Thus when for many years, through many shapes,
He has them dri v’n in Lethe lake at last,
Them purg’d he turns to mans forms whence they past.
If the soul had been valiant, they placed it in the body of a Lion: if Voluptuous, in a
Swine: if faint-harted, in a Stagge or a Hare; if malicious, in a Foxe; and so of the, rest,
until that being purified by this punishment, it re-assumed and took the body of some
other man again.
Ipse ego, nam memini, Troiani tempore belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram. -- Ovid. Metam. xv. 160.
When Troy was won, I, as I call to mind,
Euphorbus was, and Panthus son by kind.
As touching that alliance betweene us and beasts, I make no great accompt of it, nor do I
greatly admit it, neither of that which diverse Nations, and namely of the most ancient and
noble, who have not only received beasts into their societie and companie, but allowed

them a place far above themselves; sometimes deeming them to be familiars and favored
of their Gods, and holding them in a certain awful respect and reverence more than
humane, and others acknowledging no other God nor no other Divinity than they. Belluæ
a barbaris propter beneficium consecratæ: (Cic. Nat. Deor. i.) ’Beasts by the Barbarians
were made sacred for some benefit.’
----- crocodilon adorat
Pars hæc, illa pavet saturam serpentibus Ibin,
Effigies sacri hic nitet aurea Corcopitheci. Juven. Sat. xv. 2.
This Country does the Crocodile adore,
That feares the Storks glutted with Serpents gore,
The sacred Babion here, In gold shape does appeare.
-----hic piscem fluminis, illic
Oppida tota canem venerantur. -- 7.
A fish here whole Townes reverence most,
A dog they honor in that coast.
And the very same interpretation that Plutarke gives unto this error, which is very well
taken, is also honorable for t hem. For, he says, that (for example sake) it was neither the
Cat nor the Oxe that the Egyptians adored, but that in those beasts they worshipped some
image of divine faculties. In this patience and utility, and in that vivacity, or (as our
neighbors the Borgonians with all Germany) the impatience to see themselves shut up:
Whereby they represented the liberty which they loved and adored beyond all other divine
faculty, and so of others. But when amongst the most moderate opinions I meet with some
discourses that go about and labor to show the near resemblance betweene us and
beasts, and what share they have in our greatest privileges, and with how much likely-
hood they are compared unto us, truly I abate much of our presumption, and am easily
removed from that imaginary soveraigntie that some give and ascribe unto us above all
other creatures. I f all that were to be contradicted, yet is there a kind of respect and a
general duty of humanity which tieth us not only unto brute beasts that have life and
sense, but even unto trees and plants. Unto men we owe Justice, and to all other creatures
that are capable of it, grace and benignity. There is a kind of interchangable commerce
and mutual bond betweene them and us. I am not ashamed nor afraid to declare the
tenderness of my childish Nature which is such that I cannot well reject my Dog if he
chance (although out of season) to fawne upone me, or beg of me to play with him. The
Turkes have almes and certain hospitals appointed for brute beasts. The Romans have a
public care to breed and nourish Geese, by whose vigilance their capital had been
saved. The Athenians did precisely ordaine that all manner of Mules which had served or
been imploied about the building of their temple called Hecatompedon should be free

and suffered to feed wherever they pleased, without any let or impeachment. The
Agrigentines had an ordinary custom seriously and solemnly to bury all such beasts as
they had held dear; as horses of rare worth and merit, speciall dogs, choice or profitable
birds, or such as had but served to make their children sport. And the sumptnous
magnificence which in all other things was ordinary and peculiar unto them, appeared also
almost notably in the stately sumptuousnesse and costly number of monuments erected to
that end, which many ages after have endured and been maintained in pride and state. The
Egyptians were wont to bury their Wolves, their Dogs, their Cats, their Beares, and
Crocodiles in holy places, embalming their carcasses, and at their deaths, to weare
mourning weeds for them. Cymon caused a stately honorable tombe to be erected for the
Mares, wherewith he had three times gained the prize at running in the Olimpike games.
Ancient Xantippus caused his Dog to be enterred upon a hill by the sea shore, which ever
since has been named by him. And Plutarch (as himself says) made it a matter of
conscience, in hope of a small gain to sell or send an Oxe to the shambles that had served
him a long time.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XII: AN APOLOGIE OF RAYMOND SEBOND






CHAPTER XII: AN APOLOGIE OF RAYMOND SEBOND
NOWLEDGE is without all Contradiction a most profitable and chief
ornament, Those who despise it declare evidently their sottishnesse:
Yet do not I value it at so excessive a rate as some have done; namely
Herillus the Philosopher, who grounded his chief felicitie upon it, and
held that it lay in her power to make us content and wise: which I
cannot believe, nor that which others have said, that Knowledge is the
mother of all virtue, and that all vice proceedeth of ignorance. Which if it be it is subject
to a large interpretation. My house has long since ever stood open to men of
understanding, and is very well known to many of them: for my father, who commanded
the same fifty yeeres and upward, set on fire by that new kind of earnestnesse wherewith
King Francis the first imbraced Letters, and raised them unto credit, did with great
diligence and much cost endeavor to purchase the acquaintance of learned men; receiving
and entertaining them as holy persons, and who had some particular inspiration of divine
wisdom; collecting their sentences and discourses as if they had been Oracles; and with
so much more reverence and religious regard by how much less authority he had to

judge of them: for he had no knowledge of Letters no more than his predecessors before
him. As for me I love them indeed, but yet I worship them not. Amongst others, Peter
Bunel (a man in his time by reason of his learning of high esteeme) having sojourned a
few days at Montaigne with my father and others of his coat being ready to depart thence,
presented him with a book entituled Theologia naturalis; sive liber creaturarum magistri
Raimondi de Sebonde. And for so much as the Italian and Spanish tongues were very
familiar unto him, and that the book was written in a kind of latinized Spanish, whereof
diverse words had Latine terminations; he hoped that with little aid he might reape no small
profit by it, and commended the same very much unto him, as a book most profitable,
and fitting the dayes in which he gave it him. It was even at what time the new fangles of
Luther began to creepe in favor, and in many places to shake the foundation of our
ancient beleefe. Wherein he seemed to be well advised, as he who by discourse of reason
fore-saw that this budding disease would easily turn to an execrable Atheisme: For the
vulgar wanting the faculty to judge of things by themselves, suffering itself to be carried
away by fortune and led on by outward apparances, if once it be possessed with the
boldness to despise and malapertnesse to impugne the opinions which tofore it held in
awful reverence (as are those wherein consisteth their salvation) and t hat some articles of
their religion be made doubtfull and questionable, they will soon and easily admit an equal
uncertainty in all other parts of their beleefe, as they that had no other grounded authority
or foundation but such as are now shaken and weakned, and immediately reject (as a
tyrannical yoke) all impressions they had in former times received by the authority of
Lawes, or reverence of ancient custom.
Nam cupide conculcatur nimis anti metutum. -- Lucr. v. 1150.
That which we fear’d before too much,
We gladly scorne when tis not such.
Undertaking thenceforward to allow of nothing, except they have first given their voice
and particular consent to the same. My father, a few days before his death, lighting by
chance upon this book, which before he had neglected, amongst other writings
commanded me to translate the same into French. It is easy to translate such Authors,
where nothing but the matter is to be represented; but hard and dangerous to undertake
such as have added much to the grace and elegancy of the language, namely to reduce
them into a weaker and poorer tongue. It was a strange taske and new occupation for me:
but by fortune being then at leisure and unable to gainsay the commandement of the best
father that ever was, I came ere long (as well as I could) to an end of it: wherein he took
singular delight, and commanded the same to be printed, which accordingly was after his
decease performed. I found the conceits of the author to be excellent, the contexture of his
work well followed, and his project full of pietie. Now forasmuch as diverse ammuse
themselves to read it, and especially Ladies, to whom we own most service, it has often
been my hap to help them, when they were reading it, to discharge the book of two
principal objections, which are brought against the same. His drift is bold, and his scope

adventurous for he undertaketh by humane and natural reasons, to establish and verifie all
the articles of Christian religion against Atheists. Wherein (to say truth) I find him so
resolute and so happy, as I deem it a thing impossible to do better in that argument, and
think that none equalleth him. Which book seeming to me both over-rich and exquisite,
being written by an author whose name is so little known, and of whom all we know is,
that he was a Spaniard, who about two hundred yeeres since professed Physicke in
Tholouse: I demanded once of Adrianus Turnebus (a man who knew all things) what such
a book might be; who answered, that he deemed the same to be some Quintessence
extracted from out Saint Thomas Aquinas: For, in good truth, only such a spirit fraught
with so infinite erudition, and so full admirable subtilities was capable of such and so rare
imitiations. So it is, that whosoever be the author or deviser of it (the title whereof ought
not without further reason to be taken from Sebond) he was a very sufficient-worthie man,
and endowed with sundrie other excellent qualities. The first thing he is reproved for in
his Book is, that Christians wrong themselve much, in that they ground their beleefe
upon humane reasons, which is conceived but by faith and by a particular inspiration of
God. Which objection seems to containe some zeale of pietie; by reason whereof we
ought, with so much more mildnes and regard, endeavor to satisfie them that propose it. It
were a charge more befitting a man conversant, and suitable to one acquainted with the
holy Scriptures, than me, who am altogether ignorant in them. Nevertheless I think, that
even as to a matter so divine and high, and so much exceeding al humane understanding,
as is this verity, wherwith it has pleased the goodness of God to enlighten as, it is most
requisit that he affoord and lend us his helpe; And that; with an extraordinary and
privileged favor, that so we may the better conceive and entertaine the same: For, I
suppose that means meerely humane can no way be capable of it; which if they were, so
many rare and excellent mindes, and so plenteously stored with natural faculties, as have
been in times past, would never by their discourse have mist the attayning of this
knowledge. It is faith only which lively and assuredly embraceth the high mysteries of
our Religion. And no man can doubt but that it is a most excellent and commendable
enterprise, properly to accommodate and fit to the service of our faith, the natural helpes
and humane implements which God has bestowed upon us. And no question is to be
made but that it is the most honorable employment we can put them unto; and that there
is no occupation or intent more worthy a good Christian, than by all means, studies, and
imaginations, carefully to endeavor how to embellish, amplifie, and extend the truth of his
beleefe and religion. It is not enough for us to serve God in spirit and soul; we owe him
besides, and we yield unto him , a corporall worshipping; we applie our limbs, our
motions, and all external things, to honor him. The like ought to be done, and we should
accompany our faith with all the reason we possesse: Yet alwayes with this proviso, that
we think it does not depend of us, and that all our strength and arguments can never
attaine to so supernaturall and divine a knowledge: Except it seize upon us, and as it were
enter into us by an extraordinarie infusion: And unless it also enter into us not only by
discourse, but also by humane means, she is not in her dignitie nor in her glory. And
verily I fear therfore, that except this way, we should not enjoy it. Had we fast-hold on
God; by the interposition of a lively faith; had we hold-fast on God by himself, and not

by us; had we a divine foundation; then should not humane and worldly occasions have
the power so to shake and totter us, as they have. Our hold would not then yield to so
weake a battery: The love of noveltie; the constrainte of Princes; the good success of one
partie; the rash and casual changing of our opinions, should not then have the power to
shake and alter our beleefe. We should not suffer the same to be troubled at the wil and
pleasure of a new argument, and at the persuasion , no, not of all the rhetorike that ever
was we should withstand these boistrous billowes with an inflexible and unmoveable
constancy:
Illisos fluctus rupes, ut vasta refundit
Et varias circumlatrantes dissipat undas,
---Mole sua. -- VIRG. Æn. vii. 587.
As huge rocks do regorge the invective waves,
And dissipate the billowes brawling braves,
Which these gainst those still bellowe out.
Those being big and standing stout.
If this raie of Divinitie did in any sort touch us, it would everie where appeare: Not only
our words, but our actions, would bear some show and lustre of it. Whatsoever should
proceed from us, might be seen inligh tned with this noble and matchlesse brightness.
We should blush for shame, that in humane sects there was never any so factious, what
difficultie or strangenesse soever his doctrine maintained, but some sort conforme his
behaviors and square his life unto it: Whereas so divine and heavenly an institution never
markes Christians but by the tongue. And will you see whether it be so? Compare but our
manners unto a Turke, or a Pagan, and we must needs yield unto them: Whereas in
respect of our religious superioritie, we ought by much, indeed by an incomparable distance,
out-shine them in excellencie: And well might a man say, Are they so just, so charitable,
and so good? Then must they be Christians. All other outward shewes and exterior
apparences are common to all religious: As hope, affiance, events, ceremonies, penitence,
and martyrdoms. The peculiar badge of our truth should be virtue; As it is the heavenliest
and most difficult marke, and worthiest production of Verity itself, And therefore was
our good Saint Lewis in the right, when that Tartarian King, who was become a Christian,
intended to come to Lyons, to kisse the Popes feet, and there to view the sanctitie he hoped
to find in our lives and manners, instantly to divert him from it, fearing lest our dissolute
manners and licentious kind of life might scandalize him, and so alter his opinion fore-
conceived of so sacred a religion. Howbeit the contrary happened to another, who for the
same effect being come to Rome, and there viewing the disolutenesse of the Prelates and
people of those dayes, was so much the more confirmed in our religion; considering with
himself what force and divinity it must of consequence have, since it was able, amidst so
many corruptions and so viciously-poluted hands, to maintaine her dignitie and splendor.
Had we but one only graine of faith, we should then be able to remove mountaines
from out their place, says the Holy Writ. Our actions being guided and accompanied with

Divinitie, should not then be meerely humane, but even as our beliefe, containe some
wonder-causing thing. Brevis est institutio vitæ honestæ beatæque, si credas: ’The
institution of an honest and blessed life is but short, if a man believe.’ Some make the
world believe that they believe things they never do. Others (and they are the greater
number) persuade themselves they do so, as unable to conceive what it is to believe. We
think it strange if in wars, which at this time do so oppresse our state we see the
events to float so strangely, and with so common and ordinary a manner to change and
alter: The reason is, we adde nothing unto it but our own. Justice, which is on the one
side, is used but for a cloake and ornament; she is indeed alleadged, but not received, nor
harboured, nor wedded. She is as in the mouth of a Lawyer, and not as she ought in the
heart and affection of the partie. God oweth his extraordinarie assistance unto faith and
religion, and not to our passions. Men are but directors unto it and use religion for a
show: It ought to be cleane contrary. Doe but marke if we do not handle it as it were a
peece of waxe, from out so right and so firme a rule, to draw so many contrary shapes.
When was this better seen than now-adaies in France? Those which have taken it on the
left, and those who have taken it on the right hand: Such as speak the false, and such who
speak the truth of it, do so likewise employ and fit the same to their violent and ambitious
enterprises, proceede unto it with so conformable a proceeding in riotousnesse and
injustice, they make the diversitie they pretend in their opinions doubtfull, and hard to be
beleeved, in a thing from which depends the conduct and law of our life. Can a man see
from one same School and Discipline, more united and like customs and fashions to
proceed? View but the horrible impudencie wherewith we tosse divine reasons to and fro,
and how irreligiously we have both rejected and taken them again, according as fortune
has in these public stormes transported us from place to place. This solemn
proposition: Whether it be lawfull for a subject, for the defense of religion, to rebell and
take arms against his Prince: Call but to mind in what mouthes but a twelve-moneth
agoe the affirmative of the same was the chief pillar of the one part; the negative was the
main-underprop of the other: And listen now from whence commeth the voice and
instruction of one and other: and whether arms clatter and clang less for this than for that
cause. And we burne those men which say that truth must be made to abide the yoke of
our need: And how much worse does France than speak it. Let us confesse the truth: he
that from out this lawfull army should cull out first those who follow it for meere zeale of
a religious affection than such as only regard the defense and protection of their countries
laws or service of their Prince; whether he could ever erect a compleat company of
armed men. How comes it to pass that so few are found who have still held one same wil
and progresse in our public revolutions, and that we see them now and then but faintly
and sometimes as fast as they can headlong to run into the action? And the same men,
now by their violence and rashnesse, and now through their slowness demissnes, and
heavines to spoile, and as it were overthrow our affairs, but that they are thrust into them
by casual motives, and particular consideration, according to the diversities wherewith
they are moved? I plainly perceive we lend nothing unto devotion but the offices that
flatter our passions. There is no hostilitie so excellent as that which is absolutely
Christian. Our zeale worketh wonders, whenever it secondeth our inclinations towards

hatred, crueltie, ambition, avarice, detraction, or rebellion. Towards goodnes, benignitie,
or temperance it goeth but slowly, and against the hair, except miraculously, some rare
complexion leade him unto it, it neither runnes nor flieth to it. Our religion was ordained
to root out vices, but it shrowdeth, fostreth, and provoketh them. As commonly we say,
’We must not make a foole of God.’ Did we believe in him, I say not through faith, but with
a simple beleefe; indeed (I speak it to our confusion) did we but believe and know him, as
we do an other story, or as one of our companions; we should then love him above all
other things, by reason of the infinite goodnes and unspeakable beauty that is and shines
in him: Had he but the same place in our affections that riches, Pleasures, glory, and our
friends have: The best of us does not so much fear to wrong him as he does to injure his
neighbour, his kinsman, or his master. Is there so simple a mind who, on the one side
having before him the object of one of our vicious pleasures, and on the other to his full
view perfect knowledge and assured persuasion, the state of an immortall glory, that
would enter into contention of one for the other? And so we often refuse it through meere
contempt: for what draws us to blaspheming, unless it be at all adventures, the desire it
self of the offence? The Philosopher Antisthenes, when he was initiated in the mysteries
of Orpheus, the priest saying unto him that such as vowed themselves to that religion
should after death receive eternall and perfect felicities, replied, ’If you believe it, why
do you not die your self?’ Diogenes more roughly (as his manner was) and further from
our purpose, answered the priest who persuaded him to be one of his order, that so he
might come unto and attaine the happinesse of the other world: ’Wilt you have me believe
that those famous men, Agesilaus and Epaminondas, shall be miserable, and that you,
who art but an asse, and does nothing of any worth; shall be happy, because you are a
Priest?’ Did we but receive these large promises of everlasting blessednesse with like
authority as we do a philosophicall discourse, we should not then have death in that
horror as we have:
Non jam se moriens dissolvi conquereretur,
Sed magis ire foras, vestemque relinquere ut anguis
Gauderet, prælonga senex aut cornua cervus. -- Lucr. iii. 630
He would not now complains to be dissolved dying,
But rather more rejoice , that now he is forth-flying,
Or as a Snake his coat out-worne,
Or as old Harts, does cast his horne.
I will be dissolved, should we say, and be with Jesus Christ. The forcible power of
Platoes discourse of the immortality of the soul provoked diverse of his Schollers unto
death, that so they might more speedily enjoy the hopes he told them of. All which is a
most evident token that we receive our religion but according to our fashion and by our
own hands, and no otherwise than other religions are received. We are placed in the
countrie where it was in use; where we regard her antiquity, or the authority of those who
have maintained her; where we fears the menaces wherewith she threatneth all

misbeleevers, or follow her promises. The considerations ought to be applied and
employed to our beleefe, but as subsidiaries: they be human bonds. Another country, other
testimonies, equall promises, likewise menaces, might semblaby imprint a cleane contrary
religion in us: we are Christians by the same title as we are either Perigordins or Germans.
And as Plato says: ’There are few so confirmed in Atheisme but some great danger will
bring unto the knowledge of God’s divine power.’ The part does not touch or concerne a
good Christians: It is for mortal and worldly religions to be received by a humane
convoy. What faith is that like to be which cowardice of heart does plant and weaknesse
establish in us? A goodly faith, that beleeves that which it beleeveth only because it
wanteth the courage not to believe the same. A vicious passion, as that of inconstancie
and astonishment is, can it possibly ground any regular production in our mindes or
soules? They establish, says he, by the reason of their judgement, that whatsoover is
reported of hell, or of after-coming paines, is but a fiction: but the occasions to make
trial of it, offering itself at what time age or sicknesse does summon them to death, the
error of the same, through the horrour of their future condition, does then replenish them
with another kind of beleefe. And because such impressions make mens hearts fearfull,
he by his laws inhibiteth all instruction of such threats and the persuasion that any evil
may come unto man from the Gods, except for his greater good, and for a medicinable
effect, whensoever he falleth into it. They report of Bion that being infected with the
Atheismes of Theodorus, he had for a long time made but a mockerie of religious men;
but when death did once seize upon him he yielded unto the extremest superstitious: As if
the Gods would either be removed or come again, according to Bions business. Plato and
these examples conclude that we are brought to believe in God either by reason or by
compulsion, Atheisme being a proposition as unnaturall and monstrous as it is hard and
uneasie to be established in any mans mind, how insol ent and unruly soever he may be:
many have been seen to have conceived either through vanity or fiercenesse, strange
and seld-known opinion, as if they would become reformers of the world by affecting a
profession only in countenance: who though they be sufficiently foolish, yet are they not
powerfull enough to ground or settle it in their consciences. Yet will not such leave to lift
up their joined hands to heaven, give them but a stoccado on their breast: and when fear
shall have supprest, or sicknesse vanquished this licentious fervour of a wavering mind,
then will they suffer themselves gently to be reclaimed, and discreetly to be persuaded to
give credit unto true beliefe and public examples. A decree seriously digested is one
thing, and these shallow and superficiall impressions another, which bred by the
dissolutenesse of a loose spirit, do rashly and uncertainely float up and down the
fantasie of a man. Oh men, most braine-sicke and miserable, that endeavour to be worse
than they can! The error of Paganisme and the ignorance of our sacred truth, was the
cause of this great soules-fall: but only great in worldly greatnes; also in this next abuse,
which is, that children and old men are found to be more susceptible or capable of
religion, as if it were bred and had her credit from our imbecillitie. The bond which should
binde our judgement, tie our will, enforce and join our soules to our Creator, should be
a bond taking his doubling and forces, not from our considerations, reasons, and
passions, but from a divine and supernaturall compulsion, having but one form, one

countenance, and one grace, which is the authority and grace of God. Now our heart
being ruled and our soul commanded by faith, reason wills that she draws all our
other parts to the service of her intent, according to their power and facultie. Nor is it
likely but that this vast worlds-frame must bear the impression of some markes, therein
imprinted by the hand of this great wondrous architect, and that even in all things therein
created there must be some image, somewhat resembling and having coherencie with the
workeman that wrought and framed them. He has left imprinted in these high and
misterious works the characters of his divinitie: and only our imbecility is the cause we
can not discover nor read them. It is that which himself telleth us, that by his visible
operations be does manifest those that are invisible to us. Sebond has much travelled
about this worthie studie, and sheweth us, that there is no parcell of this world that either
belyeth or shameth his Maker. It were a manifest wronging of God’s goodnesse if all this
universe did not consent and sympathise with our beleefe. Heaven, earth, the elements,
our bodies, our soul, indeed all things else, conspire and agree unto it: only the means how
to make use of them must be found out: They will instruct us sufficiently, be we but
capable to learne and to to understand. For this world is a most holy temple, into which
man is brought there to behold statues and images not wrought by mortal hand, but such
as the secret thought of God has made sensible, as the Sunne, the Starres, the Waters and
the Earth, thereby to represent the intelligible unto us. ’The invisible things of God,’ says
St. Paul, ’do evidently appeare by the creation of the world, judgeing of his eternall
Wisdome and Divinity by his workes.
Atque adeo faciem coeli non invidet orbi
Ipse Deus, vultusque suos corpusque recludit
Semper volvendo seque ipsum inculcat et offert
Ut bene coqnosci possit, doceatque videndo
Qualis est, doceatque suas attendere leges. -- Manil. iv. 840.
God to the world does not heav’ns face envie,
But by still moving it does notifie
His face and essence, does himself applie,
That he may well be knowen, and teach by seeing,
How he goes, how we should marke his decreeing.
Now our reason and humane discourse is as the lumpish and barren matter, and the
Grace of God is the form thereof. ’Tis that which gives both fashion and worth unto it.
Even as the vertuous actions of Socrates and Cato are but frivolous and unprofitable
because they had not their end, and regarded not the love and obedience of the true creator
of all things, and namely, because they were ignorant of the true knowledge of God: So is
it of our imaginations and discourse; they have a kind of body, but a shapelesse masse,
without light or fashion, unless faith and the grace of God be ioyned thereunto. Faith,
giving as it were a tincture and lustre unto Sebonds arguments, make them the more firme
and solid: They may well serve for a direction and guide to a young learner, to lead and

set him in the right way of this knowledge. They in some sort fashion and make him
capable of the grace of God, by means whereof our beliefe is afterwards achieved and
made perfect. I know a man of authority, brought up in letters, who confessed unto me
that he was reclaimed from out the errours of mis-beleeving by the arguments of Sebond.
And if it happen they be dispoyled of this ornament, and of the helpe and approbation of
faith, and taken but for meere humane fantazies, yet to combat those that headlong are
fallen into the dreadfull error and horrible darkenesse of irreligious even then shall they be
found as firme and forcible as any other of that condition that may be opposed against
them. So that we shall stand upon terms to say unto our parties,
Si melius quid habes, accerse, vel imperium fer. -- Hor. i. Epist.v. 6.
If you have any better, send for me,
Or else that I bid you, contented be.
Let them either abide the force of our proofes, or show us some others, upon some other
subject, better compact and more full. I have in a manner unawares half engaged my self
in the second objection, to which I had purposed to frame an answer for Sebond. Some of
his arguments are weake and simple to verifie what he would, and undertake to front him
easily. Such fellowes must somewhat more roughly be handled, for they are more
dangerous and more malicious than the first. Man does willingly apply other mens sayings
to the advantage of the opinions he has fore-judged in himself. ’To an Atheist all
writings make for Atheisme. He with his own venome infecteth the innocent matter.
These have some preoccupation of judgment that makes their taste wallowish and
tastelesse, to conceive the reasons of Sebond. As for the rest, they think to have fair play
offered them if they have free liberty to combat our religion with meere worldly weapons;
which they durst not charge, did they behold her in her majesty, full of authority and
commandement. The means I use to suppresse this frenzy, and which seems the fittest
for my purpose, is to crush and trample this humane pride and fiercenesse under foot, to
make them feel the emptinesse, vacuitie, and no worth of man: and violently to pull out
of their hands the silly weapons of their reason; to make them stoop, and bite and snarle
at the ground, under the authority and reverence of God’s Majesty. Only to her belongeth
science and wisdom, it is she alone can judge of herself; and from her we steale
whatsoever we repute, value, and count ourselves to be.
Ου γαρ εα φρονειν ο θεος εγα αλλον η εαυτον.
Of greater, better, wiser mind than he,
God can abide no mortal man should be.
Let us suppress this overweening, the first foundation of the tyrannie of the wicked
spirit. Deus superbis resistit: humilibus autem dat gratiam: (Prov. iii. 14, iv. 6. 1. Pet. v.

5.) ’God resisteth the proud, but gives grace to the humble.’ Plato says ’that intelligence
is in all the Gods, but little or nothing at all in men.’ Meanewhile it is a great comfort unto
a Christian man to see our mortal implements and fading tooles so fitly sorted to our holy
and divine faith; that when they are employed to the mortal and fading subjects of their
nature, they are never more forcible nor more joyntlie appropriated unto them. Let us then
see whether man has any other stronger reasons in his power then Sebondes, and whether
it be in him, by argument or discourse, to come to any certainty. For, St. Augustine,
pleading against these kind of men, because he would upbraid them with their injustice, in
that they hold the parts of our beleefe to be false, and that our reason faileth in
establishing them: and to show that many things may be, and have been, whereof our
discourse can never ground the nature and the causes: he proposeth and setteth down
before them certain knowen and undoubted experiments, wherein man confesseth to see
nothing, which he does as all things else, with a curious and ingenious search. More must
be done, and they must be taught, that to convince the weaknesse of their reason we need
not go far to cull out rare examples. And that it is so defective and blinde, as there is no
facility so clear that is clear enough unto her: that easy and uneasie is all one to her; that
all subjects equally, and Nature in general disavoweth her jurisdiction and interposition.
What preacheth truth unto us, when it biddeth us flie and shun worldly philosophy; when
it so often telleth us ’that all our wisdom is but folly before God; that of all vanities man
is the greatest; that man, who presumeth of his knowledge, does not yet know what
knowledge is: and that man, who is nothing, if he but think to be something, seduceth and
deceiveth bimselfe?’ These sentences of the Holy Ghost do so lively and manifestly
express what I would maintaine, as I should neede no proofe against such as with all
submission and obeysance would yield to his authority. But these will needs be whipt to
their own cost, and cannot abide their reason to be combatted, but by itself. Let us now
but consider man alone without other help, armed but with his own weapons, and
unprovided of the grace and knowledge of God, which is all his honor, all his strength,
and all the ground of his being. Let us see what hold-fast or free-hold he has in this
gorgeous and goodly equipage. Let him with the utmost power of his discourse make me
understand upon what foundation he has built those great advantages and ods he
supposeth to have over other creatures. Who has persuaded him that this admirable
moving of heavens vaults, that the eternal light of these lampes so fiercely rowling over
his head, that the horror-moving and continnall motion of this infinite vaste ocean were
established, and continue so many ages for his commoditie and service? Is it possible to
imagine anything so ridiculous as this miserable and wretched creature, which is not so
much as master of himself, exposed and subject to offences of all things, and yet dareth
call himself Master and Emperor of this Universe? In whose power it is not to know the
least part of it., much less to command the same. And the Privileges which he so fondly
challengeth to be the only absolute creature in this huge worlds frame, perfectly able to
know the absolute beautie and several parts thereof, and that he is only of power to yield
the great architect thereof due thanks for it, and to keep account both of the receipts and
layings out of the world. Who has sealed him his patent? Let him show us his letters of
privilege for so noble and so great a charge. Have they been granted only in favor of the

wise? Then concerne they but a few. Are the foolish and wicked worthy of so
extraordinary a favor, who being the worst part of the world, should they be preferred
before the rest? Shall we believe him: Quorum igitur causa quis dixerit effectum esse
mundum? Eorum scilicet animantium quo ratione utuntur. Hi sunt dii et homines, quibus
profecto nihil est melius: (CIC. Nat. Deor. ii.) ’For whose cause then shall a man say that
the world was made? In sooth, for those creatures sake which have the use of reason;
those are Gods and men, than whom assuredly nothing is better.’ We shall never
sufficiently baffle the impudency of this conjoyning. But silly wretch, what has he in him
worthie such an advantage? To consider the incorruptible life of the celestiall bodies, their
beauty, greatness, and agitation, continued with so just and regular a course.
----- cum suspicimus magni celestia mundi
Templa super, stellisque micantibus Æthera fixum,
Et venit in mentem Lunæ Solisque viarum. -- LUCR. v. 1214
When we of this great world the heavenly temples see
Above us, and the skies with shine-starres fixt to be,
And marks in our discourse, Of Sunne and Moone the course.
To consider the power of domination these bodies have not only upon our lives and
condition of our fortune.
Facta etenim et vitas hominum suspendit ab astris. -- MANIL. Astron. iii.
58.
For on the stars he does suspend
Of men, the deeds, the lives, and end.
But also over our dispositions and inclinations, our discourses and wils, which they rule,
provoke, and move at the pleasure of their influences, as our reason finds and teacheth us.
------ speculataque longe
Deprendit tacitis dominantia legibus astra.
Et totum alterna mundum ratione moveri,
Fatorumque vices certis discernere signis. -- MANIL. Astron. i. 62.
By speculation it from far discerns,
How stars by secret laws do guide our sterns,
And this whole world is moov’d by entercourse
And by sure signes of fates to know the course.
Seeing that not a man alone, nor a king only, but monarchies and empires; indeed, and all the

world below is moved at the shaking of one of the least heavenly motions.
Quantaque quam parvi faciant discrimina motus:
Tantum est hoc regnum quod regibus imperat ipsis. -- MANIL. Astron. iv.
93.
How little motions make, how different affection:
So great this Kingdoms is, that has Kings in subjection.
If our virtue, vices, sufficiency and knowledge, and the same discourse we make of the
power of the starres, and the comparison betweene them and us, commeth as our reason
judgeth by their meane and through their favor;
--furit alter amore,
Et pontum tranare potest, et vertere Troiam,
Alterius sors est scibendis legibus apta:
Ecce patrem nati perimunt, natosque parentes,
Mutuaque armati coeunt in vuln era fratres,
Non nostrum hoc bellum est; coquntur tanta movere,
Inque suas ferri ponas, lacerandaque membra:
Hoc quoque fatale est sic ipsum expandere fatum. -- MANIL. Astron. iv.
78, 118.
One with love madded, his love to enjoy
Can crosse the seas, and overturns all Troy
Anothers lot is to set laws severe.
Lo sons kill fathers, fathers sons destroy,
Brothers for mutual wounds their arms do bear,
Such war is not our own, forc’t are we to it,
Drawne to our own paines, our own limbs to teare
Fates so t’observe t’is fatall, we must do it.
If we hold that portion of reason, which we have from the distribution of heaven, how
can she make us equall unto it? How can she submit his essence and conditions unto our
knowledge? Whatsoever we behold in those high bodies does affright us: Quæ molitio,
quæ ferramenta, qui vectes, quo machinæ, qui ministri tanti operis fuerunt? (CIC. Nat.
Deor. i.) ’What workmanship? What yron-braces? What main beames, what engines?
What masons and carpenters were to so great a work?’ Why do we then deprive them
of soul, of life, and of discourse? Have we discovered or knowen any unmoveable or
insensible stupidity in them? We, who have no commerce but of obedience with them?
Shall we say we have seen the use of a reasonable soul in no other creature but in man?
What? Have we seen anything comparable to the sunne? Leaveth he to be, because we

have seen nothing semblable unto it? And does he leave his moving because his equall is
nowhere to be found? If that which we have not seen is not, our knowledge is wonderful
abridged. Quæ sunt tantæ, animi angustia? ’What narrownesse of my heart is such?’ Be
they not dreames of humane vanity, to make a celestiall earth or world of the moone, as
Anaxagoras did? And there in to plant habitations, and as Plato and Plutarch do, erect
their colonies for our use. And to make of our known earth a bright shining planet? Inter
cætera mortalitatis incommoda, et hoc est caligo mentium: nec tantum necessitas errandi,
sed errorum amor: (SEN. Ira. ii. cap. 9.) ’Among other discommodities of our mortality
this is one, there is darknesse in our minds, and in us not only necessity of erring, but a
love of errors.’ Corruptibile corpus aggravat animam, et deprimit terrena inhabitatio
sensum multa cogitantem: (Ibid. Epist. xcv.) ’Our corruptible body does overlode our
soul, and our dwelling on earth weighs down our sense that is set to think of many
matters.’ Presumption is our natural and originall infirmitie. Of all creatures man is the
most miserable and fraile, and therewithall the proudest and disdainfullest. Who
perceiveth and seeth himself placed here amidst the filth and mire of the world, fast-tied
and nailed to the worst, most senselesse, and drooping part of the world, in the vilest
corner of the house, and farthest from heavens coape, with those creatures that are the
worst of the three conditions; and yet dareth imaginarily place himself above the circle of
the moon, and reduce heaven under his feet. It is through the vanity of the same
imagination that he dare equall himself to God, that he ascribeth divine conditions unto
himself, that he selecteth and separateth himself from out the rank of other creatures; to
which his fellow-brethren and compeers he cuts out and shareth their parts, and allotteth
them what portions of means or forces he thinkes good. How knows he by the virtue of
his understanding the inward and secret motions of beasts? By what comparison from
them to us does he conclude the brutishnesse he ascribeth unto them? When I am playing
with my cat, who knowes whether she have more sport in dallying with me than I have in
gaming with her? We entertaine one another with mutual apish trickes. If I have my
hour to begin or to refuse, so has she hers. Plato in setting forth the golden age under
Saturne, amongst the chief advantages that man had then, reporteth the communication
he had with beasts, of whom enquiring and taking instruction, he knew the true qualities
and differences of every one of them: by and from whom he got an absolute understanding
and perfect wisdom, whereby he led a happier life than we can do. Can we have a
better proofe to judge of mans impudency touching beasts? This notable author was of
opinion that in, the greatest part of the corporall form which nature has bestowed on
them, she has only respected the use of the prognostications, which in his days were
thereby gathered. The defect which hindreth the communication betweene them and us,
why may it not as well be in us as in them? It is a matter of divination to guesse in whom
the fault is that we understand not one another. For we understand them no more than they
us. By the same reason, may they as well esteeme us beasts as we them. It is no great
marvell if we understand them not: no more do we the Cornish, the Welch, or Irish. Yet
have some boasted that they understood them, as Apollonius Thyaneus, Melampus,
Tiresias, Thales, and others. And if it be (as Cosmographers report that there are nations
who receive and admit a dogge to be their king, it must necessarily follow that they give a

certain interpretation to his voice and moving. We must note the parity that is betweene
us. We have some meane understanding of their senses, so have beasts of ours, about the
same measure. They flatter and faune upon us, they threat and entreat us, so do we them.
Touching other matters, we manifestly perceive that there is a full and perfect
communication amongst them, and that not only those of one same kind understand one
another, but even such as are of different kindes.
Et mutæ pecudes, et denique secla ferarum
Dissimilis fuerunt voces variasqe cluere,
Cum metus aut dolor est, aut eum tam gaudia gliscunt. -- LUCR. v. 1069.
Whole heards (though dumbe) of beasts, both wild and tame,
Use diverse voices, diffrent sounds to frame,
As joy, or grief, or fear,
Upspringing passions bear.
By one kind of barking of a dogge, the horse knows he is angrie; by another voice of
his, he is nothing dismaid. Even in beasts that have no voice at all, by the reciprocall
kindness which we see in them, we easily inferre there is some other meane of
entercommunication: their jestures treat, and their motions discourse.
Non alia longe ratione atque ipse videtur
Protrahere ad gestum, pueros infantia lingua. -- Ibid. 1040.
No otherwise, then for they cannot speak,
Children are drawne by signes their mindes to breake.
And why not, as well as our dumbe men dispute, argue, and tel l histories by signes? I
have some so ready and so excellent in it, that (in good sooth) they wanted nothing to
have their meaning perfectly understood. Doe we not daily see lovers with the looks and
rowling of their eyes, plainly show when they are angrie or pleased, and how they entreat
and thanke one another, assigne meetings, and express any passion?
E’l silentio ancor suole
Haver prieghi e parole.
Silence also has a way,
Words and prayers to convay.
What do we with our hands? Doe we not sue and entreat, promise and performe, call
men unto us and discharge them, bid them farewell and be gone, threaten, pray, beseech,
deny, refuse, demand, admire, number, confesse, repent, fear, be ashamed, doubt,

instruct, command, incite, encourage, sweare, witness, accuse, condemne, absolve,
injurie, despise, defie, despight, flatter, applaud, blesse, humble, mocke, reconcile,
recommend, exalt, show gladnesse, rejoice, complain, waile, sorrow, discomfort,
despair, cry out, forbid, declare silence and astonishment: and what not? with so great
variation and amplifying as if they would contend with the tongue. And with our head do
we not invite and and call to us, discharge and send away, avow, disavow, honor,
worship, disdaine, demand, direct, rejoice, affirme, deny, complain, cherish, blandish,
chide, yield, submit, brag, boast, threaten, exhort, warrant, assure, and enquire? What do
we with our eye-lids? and with our shoulders? To conclude, there is no motion nor jesture
that does not speak, and speaks in a language very easy, and without any teaching to be
understood: nay, which is more, it is a language common and public to all: whereby it
followeth (seeing the varietie and severall use it has from others) that this must rather he
deemed the proper and peculiar speech of humane nature. I omit that which necessitie in
time of need does particularly instruct and suddenly teach such as need it; and the
alphabets upon fingers, and grammars by jestures; and the sciences which are only
exercised and expressed by them: and the nations Plinie reporteth to have no other speech.
An Ambassador of the City of Abdera, after he had talked a long time unto Agis, King of
Sparta, said thus unto him: ’O King, what answer wilt you that I bear backe unto our
citizens?’ ’Thus (answered he) that I have suffered you to speak all you wouldst, and as
long as you pleasedst, without ever speaking one word.’ Is not this a kind of speaking
silence, and easy to be understood? And as for other matters; what sufficiency is there in
us that we must not acknowledge from the industry and labours of beasts? Can there be a
more formall and better ordained policy, divided into so severall charges and offices,
more constantly entertained, and better maintained, than that of Bees? Shall we imagine
their so orderly disposing of their actions, and managing of their vocations, have so
proportioned and formall a conduct without discourse, reason, and forecast?
His quidam signis atque hoc exempla sequuti,
Esse apibus partem divinæ mentis, et haustus
Aethereos dixere. --VIRG. Geor. IV. 219.
Some by these signes, by these examples moved,
Said that in Bees there is and may be proved
Some taste of heavenly kind,
Part of celestial mind.
The Swallowes which, at the approach of springtime, we see to pry, to search, and ferret
all the corners of our houses; is it without judgement they seek, or without discretion
they chuse from out a thousand places, that which is fittest for them to build their nest
andlodging? And in that prety cunning contexture and admirable framing of their houses,
would birds rather fit themselves with a round than a square figure, with an obtuse than a
right angle, except they knew both the commodities and effects of them? Would they
(suppose you) first take water and then clay, unless they guessed that the hardnesse of the

one is softened by the moistnesse of the other? Would they floore their palace with mosse
or down, except they foresaw that the tender parts of their young ones shall thereby be
more soft and easy? Would they shroud and shelter themselves from stormy weather, and
build their cabbins towards the East, unless they knew the different conditions of winds,
and considered that some are more healthfull and safe for them than some others? Why
does the Spider spin her artificiall web thicke in one place and thin in another? And now
useth one, and then another knot, except she had an imaginary kind of deliberation, fore-
thought, and conclusion? We perceive by the greater part of their workes what excellency
beasts have over us, and how weake our art and short our cunning is, if we go about to
imitate them. We see, notwithstanding, even in our grosest works, what faculties we
employ in them, and how our mind employeth the uttermost of her skill and forces in
them: why should we not think as much of them? Wherefore do we attribute the
workes which excel whatever we can performe, either by nature or by art, unto a kind of
unknown, natural, and servile inclination? Wherein unawares we give them a great
advantage over us, to infer that nature, led by a certain loving kindness, leadeth and
accompanieth them (as it were by the hand) unto all the actions and commodities of their
life; and that she forsaketh and leaveth us to the hazard of fortune; and by art to quest and
find out those things that are behovefull and necessarie for our preservation: and
therewithall demeth us the means to attaine by any institution and contention of spirit to
the natural sufficiency of brute beasts: So that their brutish stupidity does in all
commodities exceed whatsoever our divine intelligence can effect. Verily, by this account,
we might have just cause and great reason to terme her a most injust and partiall step-
dame: But there is no such thing, our policy is not so deformed and disordered. Nature
has generally imbraced all her creatures: And there is not any but she has amply stored
with all necessary means for the preservation of their being. For the daily plaints, which I
often hear men (when the licence of their conceits does sometimes raise them above the
clouds, and then headlong tumble them down even to the Antipodes), exclaiming that
man is the only forsaken and out-cast creature, naked on the bare earth, fast bound and
swathed, having nothing to cover and arm himself withall but the spoile of others;
whereas Nature has clad and mantled all other creatures, some with shels, some with
huskes, with rindes, with hair, with wooll, with stings, with bristles, with hides, with
mosse, with feathers, with skales, with fleeces, and with silke, according as their quality
might need or their condition require: And has fenced and armed them with clawes, with
talons, with hoofes, with teeth, with stings, and with hornes, both to assaile others and to
defend themselves: And has moreover instructed them in everything fit and requisite for
them, as to swim, to run, to creepe, to flie, to roare, to bellow, and to sing: whereas man
only (Oh, silly, wretched man) can neither go, nor speak, nor shift, nor feed himself,
unless it be to whine and weepe only, except he be taught.
Tum porro, puer ut sævis projectus ab undis
Navila, nudus humi, jacit infans indignus omni
Vitali auxilio, cum primum in luminis oras
Nexibus ex alvo matris natura profundit,

Vagituque locum lugibri complet, et æqum est
Cui tantum in vita restet transire malorum:
At variæ crescunt pecudes, armenta, feræque,
Nec crepitacula eis opus est, nec cuiquam adhibenda est
Almæ nutricis blanda atque infracta loquela:
Nec varias quærunt vestes pro tempore cæli:
Denique non armis opus est, non mænibus altis
Qeis sua tutentur quando omnibus omnia large
Tellus ipsa parit, naturaque dædata rerum.-- LUCR. v. 222.
An infant, like a shipwracke ship-boy cast from seas,
Lies naked on the ground and speechlesse, wanting all
The helpes of vital spirit, when nature with small ease
Of throes, to see first light, from her wombe lets him fall,
Then, as is meet, with mournful cries he fils the place,
For whom so many ils remaine in his lives race.
But diverse herds of tame and wild beasts foreward spring,
Nor need they rattles, nor of Nurces cockring-kind
The flattering broken speech their lullaby need sing.
Nor seek they diverse coats, as diverse seasons bind.
Lastly no armour need they, nor high-reared wall
Whereby to guard their own, since all things unto all
Worke-master nature does produce,
And the earth largely to their use.
Such complaints are false. There is a greater equality and more uniform relation in the
policy of the world. Our skin is as sufficiently provided with hardnesse against the injuries
of the weather as theirs. Witness diverse nations which yet never knew the use of clothes.
Our ancient Gaules were but slightly apparelled, no more are the Irish-men, our
neighbors, in so cold a climate: which we may better judge by ourselves, for all those
parts of our body we are pleased to leave bare to winde and wether, are by experience
found able to endure it. If there were any weake part in us which in likely-hood should
seem to fear cold, it ought to be the stomacke, where digestion is made. Our forefathers
used to have it bare, and our ladies (as dainty-nice as they be) are many times seen to go
open-breasted, as low as their navill. The handles and swathes about our children are no
more necessary: and the mothers of Lacedemonia brought up theirs in all liberty and
loosenesse of moving their limbs without swathing or binding. Our whining, our puling,
and our weeping is common to most creatures, and diverse of them are often seen to waile
and grone a long time after their birth, forasmuch as it is a countenance fitting the
weaknesse wherein they feel themselves. As for the use of eating and feeding, it is in us,
as in them, natural and without teaching.
Sentit enim vim quisque suam quam possit abuti. -- LUCR. v. 1043.

For every one soone-understanding is
Of his own strength, which he may use amisse.
Who will make question that a child having attained the strength to feed himself, could
not quest for his meat and shift for his drinke? The earth without - labor or tilling does
sufficiently produce and offer him as much as he shall need. And if not at all times, no
more does she unto beasts; witness the provision we see the ants and other silly
creatures to make against the cold and barren seasons of the yeare. The nations that have
lately bin discovered, so plenteously stored with all manner of natural meat and drinke,
without care or labor, teach us that bread is not our only food: and that without toyling
our common mother nature has with great plentie stored us with whatsoever should be
needfull for us, indeed, as it is most likely, more richly and amply than now adaies she does,
that we have added so much art unto it.
Et tellus nitidas fruges vinetaque læta
Sponte sua primum mortalibus creavit,
Ipsa dedit dulces foetus, et pabulaa læta,
Quæ nunc vix nostro grandescunt aucta labore,
Conterimusque boves et vires agricolarum: -- LUCR. ii. 1166
The earth itself at first of the own accord
Did men rich Vineyards, and cleane fruit afford.
It gave sweet of-springs, food from sweeter soyle
Which yet scarse greater grow for all our toyle,
Yet tire therein we do,
Both Plough-men’s strength and Oxen too.
The gluttonous excess and intemperate lavishnesse of our appetite exceeding all the
inventions we endeavor to find out wherewith to glut and cloy the same. As for arms
and weapons, we have more that be natural unto us than the greatest part of other beasts.
We have more severall motions of limbs, and naturally without reaching: we reape more
serviceable use of them than they do. Those which are trained up to fight naked, are
seen head long to cast themselves into the same hazards and dangers as we do. If some
beasts excel us in this advantage, we exceed many others: and the industrie to enable the
skill to fortifie and the wit to shelter and cover our body by artificiall means, we have it
by a kind of natural intinct and teaching. Which to prove, the elephant does whet and
sharpen his teeth. he useth in war (for he has some he only useth for that purpose)
which he heedfully spareth and never puts them to other service: When buls prepare
themselves to fight, and they raise, scatter, and with their feet cast the dust about them: the
wild boare whets his tusks; when the Ichneumon is to grapple with the crocodile, he
walloweth his body in the mire, then lets the same drie and harden upon him, which he

does so often that at last the same becomes as hard and tough as well as any compact
crust, which serveth him in stead of a cuirace. Why shall we not say that it is as natural
for us to arm ourselves with wood and yron? As for speech, sure it is that if it be not
natural it is not necessary. I believe, nevertheless, that if a child, bred in some uncouth
solitarinesse, far from haunt of people (though it were a hard matter to make trial of it)
would no doubt have some kind of words to express, and speech to utter his conceits.
And it is not to be imagined that nature has refused us that meane and barred us that
helpe which she has bestowed upon many and diverse other creatures: for what is that
faculty we see in them when they seem to complain, to rejoice, to call one unto another
for helpe, and bid one another to loving conjunction (as commonly they do) by the use of
their voice, but a kind of speech? And shall not they speak among themselves that speak
and utter their mind unto us and we to them? How many waies speak we unto our
dogges, and they seem to understand and answer us? With another language and with
other names speak we unto and call them than we do our birds, our hogges, our oxen,
our horses, and such like; and according to their different kindes we change our idiome.
Cosi per entro loco schiera bruna
S’ammusa l’una con I’altra formica,
Forse a spiar lor via, et lor fortuna. --DANTE. Purgatorio, xxvi. 84.
So Ants amidst their sable-coloured band
One with another mouth to mouth confer,
Haply their way, or state to understand.
Me seems that Lactantius does not only attribute speech unto beasts, but also
laughing. And the same difference of tongue, which according to the diversitie of countri
es is found amongst us, is also found amongst beasts of one same kind. Aristotle to that
purpose alleageth the diverse calles or purres of partriges, according to the situation of their
place of breeding.
----- variæque volucres
Longe alias alio jaciunt in tempore voces,
Et partim mutant cum tempestatibus una
Raucisonos cantus. -- LUCR. V. 1088.
And diverse birds, send forth much diverse sounde
At diverse times, and partly change the grounds
Of their hoarce-sounding song,
As seasons change along.
But it would be known what language such a child should speak, and what some
report by divination has no great likelyhood. And if against this opinion a man would

alleage unto me that such as are naturally deafe, speak not at all: I answer that it is not
only because they could not receive the instruction of the world by their ears, but rather
inasmuch as the sense of hearing, whereof they are deprived, has some affinity with that
of speaking, both which with a natural kind of ligament or seame hold and are fastned
together. In such sort as what we speak we must first speak it unto ourselves, and
before we utter and send the same forth to strangers we make it inwardly to sound unto
our ears. I have said all this to maintaine the coherency and resemblance that is in all
humane things, and to bring us unto the general throng. We are neither above nor under
the rest: what ever is under the coape of heaven (says the wise man) runneth one law, and
followeth one fortune.
Indupedita suis fatalibus omnia vinclis. -- Ibid. 885.
All things enfolded are,
In fatall bonds as fits their share.
Some difference there is, there are orders and degrees; but all is under the visage of one
same nature,
----- res quaque suo ritu procedit, et omnes
Fædere natura certo discrimina servant. -- LUCR. v. 932.
All things proceed in their course, natures all
Keeps difference, as in their league does fall.
Man must be forced and marshalled within the lists of this policy. Miserable man, with
all his wit, cannot in effect go beyond it: he is embraced and engaged, and as other
creatures of his rank are, he is subjected in like bond, and without any prerogative or
essentiall pre-excellencie; and what ever privilege he assume unto himself, he is of very
meane condition. That which is given by opinion or fantasie has neither body nor taste.
And if it be so that he alone, above all other creatures, has this liberty of imagination and
this licence of thoughts which represent unto him both what is and what is not, and what
him pleaseth, falsehood and truth; it is an advantage bought at a very high rate, and
whereof he has little reason to glory: for thence springs the chiefest source of all the
mischiefs that oppresse him, as sinne, sicknesse, irresolution, trouble and despaire. But to
come to my purpose, I say therefore, there is no likelyhood, we should imagine, the beasts
do the very same things by a natural inclination and forced genuitie, which we do of
our freewil and industrie. Of the very same effects we must conclude likewise faculties, and
by the richest effects infer the noblest faculites, and consequently acknowledge that the
same discourse and way we hold in working, the very same, or perhaps some other better,
do beasts hold. Wherefore shall we imagine that natural compulsion in them, that prove
no such effect ourselves? Since it is more honorable to be addressed to act, and tyed to

work orderly, by and through a natural and unavoideable condition and most approching
to Divinitie, than regularly to work and act by and through a casual and rash liberty; and
it is safer to leave the reignes of our conduct unto nature than unto ourselves. The vanity
of our presumption maketh us rather to be beholding, and as it were endebted unto our
own strength, for our sufficiency, than unto her liberalitie; and enrich other creatures
with natural gifts, and yield those unto them, that so we may ennoble and honor our
selves with gifts purchased, as me thinketh, by a very simple humor: for I would prize
graces, and value gifts, that were altogether my own, and natural unto me, as much as I
would those, I had begged, and with a long prenticeship, shifted for. It lyeth not in our
power to obtaine a greater commendation than to be favoured both of God and Nature.
By that reason, the fox, which the inhabitants of Thrace use when they will attempt to
march upon the yce of some frozen river, and to that end let her go loose afore them,
should we see her running alongst the river side, approch her eare close to the yce, to
listen whether by any far or near distance she may hear the noyse or roaring of the
water running under the same, and according as she perceiveth the yce thereby to be
thicke or thinne, to go either forward or backward; might not we lawfully judge that the
same discourse possesseth her head as in like case it would ours? And that it is a kind of
debating reason and consequence drawen from natural sense? Whatsoever maketh a noyse
moveth, whatsoever moveth is not frozen, whatsoever is not frozen is liquid, whatsoever is
liquid yields under any weight? For to impute that only to a quicknesse of the sense of
hearing, without discourse or con sequence, is but a foolish conceipt, and cannot enter into
my imagination. The like must be judged of so many wiles and inventions wherewith
beasts save themselves from the snares and scape the baits we lay to entrap them. And if
we will take hold of any advantage tending to that purpose, that it is in our power to seize
upon them, to employ them to our service, and to use them at our pleasure; it is but the
same oddes we have one upon another. To which purpose we have our slaves or bond-
men; and were not the Climacides certain women in Syria, which creeping on al foure
upon the ground, served the ladies in steed of footstoles or ladders to get up into their
coachs? Where the greater part of free men, for very slight causes, abandon both their life
and being to the power of others. The wives and concubines of the Thracians strive and
contend which of them shal be chosen to be slain over her husbands or lovers tombe.
Have tyrants ever failed to find many men vowed to their devotion? Where some for an
overplus or supererogation have added this necessity, that they must necessarily
accompany them as well in death as in life. Whole hostes of men have thus tyed
themselves unto their captaines. The tenor of the oath ministred unto the schollars that
entered and were admitted the rude schoole of Roman Gladiators emplied these promises,
which was this: we vow and sweare to suffer ourselves to be enchained, beaten, burned,
and killed with the sword, and endure whatsoever any lawfull fenser ought to endure for
his master: most religiously engaging both our body and soul to the use of his service:
Ure meum, si vis, flamma caput et pete ferro
Corpus, et intorto verbere terga seca. -- TIBUL. i. El. ix. 21.

Burne tyrant (if you wilt my head with fire, with sword
My body strike, my backe cut with hard-twisted cord.
Was not this a very strict covenant? Yet were there some years ten thousand found that
entered and lost themselves in those schooles. When the Scithians buried their king, they
strangled over his dead body first the chiefest and best beloved of his concubines, then his
cup-bearer, the master of his horse, his chamberlains, the usher of his chamber, and his
master cooke. And in his anniversary killed fiftie horse, mounted with fifty pages, whom
before they had slain with thrusting sharpe stakes into their fundament, which, going up
along their chine-bone, came out at their throat; whom thus mounted; they set in orderly
rankes about the tombe. The men that serve us do it better cheape, and for a less curious
and favourable entreating than we use unto birds, unto horses, and unto dogges. What
carke and toile apply we not ourselves unto for their sakes? Me thinks the vilest and basest
servants will never do that so willingly for their masters which princes are glad to do for
their beasts. Diogenes, seeing his kinsfolks to take care how they might redeeme him out
of thraldome; ’they are fooles,’ said he, ’for it is my master that governeth, keepeth,
feedeth, and serveth me:’ And such as keep or entertaine beasts may rather say they serve
them than that they are served of them. And yet they have that natural greater
magnanimity, that never lyon was seen to subject himself unto another lyon, nor one
horse unto another horse, for want of heart. As we hunt after beasts, so tygers and lyons
hunt after men, and have a like exercise one upon another: hounds over the hare; the pike
or luce over the tench; the swallowes over the grasse-hoppers) and the sparrow-hawkes
over blacke-birds and larkes.
------ serpente ciconia pullos
Nutrit, et inventa per devia rura lacerta,
Et leporem aut capream famulæ Iovis, et generosæ
In saltu venantur aves. -- Juven. Sat. xiv. 74.
The storke her young feeds with serpents prey,
And lyzarts found somewhere out of the way,
Joves servants - Eagles, hawkes of nobler kynde,
In forrests hunt, a hare or kid to find,
We share the fruits of our prey with our dogges and hawkes, as a meed of their pain
and reward of their industry. As about Amphipolis, in Thrace, faulkners and wild hawks
divide their game equally: and as about the Mæotide fennes, if fishers do not very
honestly leave behind them an even share of their fishings for the woolves that range
about those coasts, they presently run and teare their nets. And as we have a kind of
fishing rather managed by sleight than strength, As that of hooke and line about our
angling-rods, so have beasts amongst themselves. Aristotle reporteth that the cuttle-fish
casteth a long gut out of her throat, which like a line she sendeth forth, and at her pleasure
pulleth it in again, according as she perceiveth some little fish come near her, who being

close hidden in the gravell or stronde, letteth him nible or bite the end of it, and then by
little and little draws it in unto her, until the fish be so near that, with a soudaine leape,
she may catch it. Touching strength, there is no creature in the world open to so many
wrongs and injuries as man: we need not a whale, an elephant, nor a crocodile, nor any
such other wild beast, of which one alone is of power to defeat a great number of men;
seely lice are able to make Silla give over his Dictatorship: the heart and life of a mighty
and triumphant emperor is but the break-fast of a seely little worme. Why say we that skill
to discerne and knowledge to make choyce (gotten by art and acquired by discourse) of
things good for this life, and availfull against sicknesse, and to distinguish of those which
are hurtful, and to know the virtue of reubarb, quality of oake ferne and operation of
polipodie, is only peculiar unto man? When we see the Goats of Candia being shot with
an arrow to choose from out a million of simples the herb Dittamy or Garden-ginger, and
there-with cure themselves; and the Tortoise having eaten of a Viper immediately to seek
for Origon or wild Marjoram to purge herself: the Dragon to run and clear his eyes with
Fenel: Cranes with their bils to minister glisters of sea-water unto themselves; the
Elephants to pull out, not only from themselves and their fellowes, but also from their
masters (witness that of King Porus, whom Alexander defeated) such javelins or darts as
in fight have been hurled or shot at them, so nimbly and so cunningly as ourselves could
never do it so easily and with so little pain: Why say we not likewise that that is science
and prudence in them? For, if to depress them some would alleage it is by the only
instruction and instinct of Nature they know it, that will not take the name of science and
title of prudence from them; it is rather to ascribe it unto them than unto us for the honor
of so assured a schoole-mistris. Chrysippus, albeit in other things as disdainfull a judge of
the condition of beasts as any other Philosopher, considering the earliest movings of the
dog, who coming into a path that led three severall ways in search or quest of his
Master, whom he had lost, or in pursuit of some prey that has escaped him, goeth senting
first one way and then another, and having assured himself of two, because he findeth not
the tracke of what he hunteth for, without more adoe furiously betakes himself to the
third; he is enforced to confesse that such a dog must necessarily discourse thus with
himself, ’I have followed my Masters footing hitherto, he must of necessity pass by one
of these three ways; it is neither this nor that, then consequently he is gone this other.’
And by this conclusion or discourse assuring him self, coming to the third path, he
useth his sense no more, nor sounds it any longer, but by the power of reason suffers
himself violently to be carried through it. This meere logicall tricke, and this use of
divided and conjoyned. propositions, and of the sufficient numbring of parts: is it not as
good that the dog know it by him self, as by Trapezuntius his logicke? Yet are not beasts
altogether unapt to be instructed after our manner. We teach Blacke-birds, Starlins,
Ravens, Piots, and Parots to chat; and that facilitie we perceive in them to lend us their
voice so supple and their wind so tractable, that so we may frame and bring it to a
certain number of letters and silables, witnesseth they have a kind of inward reason
which makes them so docile and willing to learne. I think every man is cloied and
wearied with seeing so many apish and mimmike trickes that juglers teach their Dogges,
as the dances, where they misse not one cadence of the sounds or notes they hear: Marke

but the diverse turnings and severall kinds of motions which by the commandement of their
bare words they make them performe: But I wonder not a little at the effect, which is
ordinary amongst us; and that is, the dogs which blind men use, both in City and in
Country: I have observed how sodainly they will stop when they come before some
doores where they are wont to receive alms: how carefully they will avoyd the shocke of
Carts and Coaches, even when they have roome enough to pass by themselves. I have
seen some going along a Town-ditch leave a plaine and even path and take a worse, that
so they might draw their Master from the ditch. How could a man make the dog conceive
his charge was only to looke to his masters safetie, and for his service to despise his own
commoditie and good? And how should he have the knowledge that such a path would be
broade enough for him, but not for a blind man? Can all this he conceived without reason?
We must not forget what Plutarke affirmeth to have seen a dog in Rome do before the
Emperor Vespasian the father in the Theatre of Marcellus. This Dog served a jugler, who
was to play a fiction of many faces and sundry countenances, where he also was to act a
part. Amongst other things he was for a long while to counterfeit and faine himself dead,
because he had eaten of a certain drug: having swallowed a piece of bread, which was
supposed to be the drug, he began sodainly to stagger and shake as if he had been giddie,
then stretching and laying himself along as stiffe as if he were stark dead, suffered
himself to be dragged and hauled from one place to another, according to the subject and
plot of the play, and when he knew his time, first he began fair and softly to stir as if he
were roused out of a dead slumber, then lifting up his head he looked and stared so gastly
that all the bystanders were amazed. The Oxen, which in the Kings gardens of Susa were
taught to water them and to draw water out of deepe wells, turned certain great wheeles,
to which were fastned great buckets (as in many places of Languedoke is commonly
seen) and being every one appointed to draw just a hundred turnes a day, they were so
accustomed to that number as it was impossible by any compulsion to make them draw
one more, which taske ended they would suddenly stop. We are grown striplings before
we can tell a hundred; and many nations have lately been discovered that never knew
what numbers meant. More discourse is required to teach others than to be taught. And
omitting what Democritus judged and proved, which is, that beasts have instructed us in
most of our Arts: As the Spider to weave and sew, the Swallow to build, the Swan and the
Nightingale music, and diverse beasts, by imitating them, the art of Physicke: Aristotle is
of opinion that Nightingales teach their young ones to sing, wherein they employ both
long time and much care: whence it followeth that those which we keep tame in cages
and have not had leisure to go to their parents schoole, lose much grace in their singing.
Whereby we may conclude they are much amended by discipline and study. And amongst
those that run wild, their song is not all one nor likewise. Each one has learnt either better
or worse, according to his capacity. And so jealous are they in their prentiseship, that to
excel one another they will so stoutly contend for the mastery that many times such as are
vanquished die; their winde and strength sooner failing than their voice. The young ones
wil very sadly sit recording their lesson, and are often seen labouring how to imitate
certain song-notes: The Scholler listeneth attentively to his Masters lesson, and carefully
yieldeth account of it; now one and then another shall hold his peace: Marke but how they

endeavor to amend their faults, and how the elder striveth to reprove the youngest. Arrius
protesteth to have seen an Elephant who on every thigh had a cimball hanging and one
fastned to his truncke, at the sound of which all other Elephants danced in a round, now
rising aloft, then lowting full low at certain cadences, even as the instrument directed
them, and was much delighted with the harmony. In the great showes of Rome Elephants
were ordinarily seen, taught to move and dance at the sound of a voice, certain dances,
wherein were many strange shifts, enterchanges, caprings, and cadences, very hard to be
learned. Some have been noted to konne and practise their lessons, using much study and
care, as being loath to be chidden and beaten of their masters. But the tale of the piot is
very strange, which Plutarke confidently witnesseth to have seen: ’This jay was in a
Barbers shop of Rome, and was admirable in counterfeiting with her voice whatsoever she
heard: It fortuned one day that certain Trumpeters staied before this shop and there
sounded a good while; and being gone, all that day and the next after the piot began to be
very sad, silent, and melancholy, whereat all men marvelled, and surmized that the noise
or clang of the trumpets had thus affrighted and dizzied her, and that with her hearing she
had also lost her voice. But at last they found she was but in a deep study and dumpish,
retracting into herself, exercising her mind, and preparing her voice to represent the
sound, and express the noise of the Trumpets she had heard. And the first voice she
uttered was that wherein she perfectly expressed their straines, their closes, and their
changes: having by her new prentiship altogether quit, and as it were scorned whatever
she could prattle before. I will not omit to alleage another example of a Dogge, which
Plutarke also says to have seen (as for any order or method I know very well I do but
confound it, which I observe no more in ranging these examples than I do in all the rest
of my business), who being in a ship, noted that his Dogge was in great perplexity how to
get some Oyle out of a deepe Pitcher, which by reason of its narrow mouth he could not
reach with his tongue, got him presently some Pibble stones, and put so many into the
jarre that he made the Oyle come up so neare the brimme as he could easily reach and
licke some. And what is that but the effect of a very subtill spirit? It is reported that the
ravens of Barbary will do the like, when the water they would drinke is too low. This
action does somewhat resemble that which Juba, a King of that Nation, relateth of their
elephants; that when through the wiles of those that chase them, anyone chanceth to fall
into certain deep pits which they prepare for them, and to deceive them they cover over
with reeds, shrubs, and boughes, his fellowes will speedily with all diligence bring great
store of stones and peeces of timber that so they may helpe to recover him out again. But
this beast has in many other effects such affinity with man’s sufficiency, that would I
particularly trace out what experience has taught, I should easily get an affirmation of
what I so ordinarily maintaine, which is, that there is more difference found betweene
such and such a man, than betweene such a beast and such a man. An Elephants keeper in
a private house of Syria was wont every meale to steele away halfe of the allowance
which was allotted him; it fortuned on a day his master would needs feed him himself,
and having poured that just measure of barley which for his allowance he had prescribed
for him, into his manger, the elephant, sternely eying his master, with his truncke divided
the provender in two equal parts, and laid the one aside, by which he declared the wrong

his keeper did him. Another having a keeper, who to encrease the measure of his
provender was wont to mingle stones with it, came one day to the pot which with meat in
it for his keepers dinner was seething over the fire, and filled it up with ashes. These are
but particular effects, but that which all the world has seen, and all men know, which is,
that in all the armies that came out of the East, their chiefest strength consisted in their
elephants, by whom they reaped, without comparison, far greater effects than now
adaies we do by our great ordnance, which in a manner holds their place in a ranged battle
(such as have any knowledge in ancient histories may easily guesse it to be true).
-----si quidem Tyrio servire solebant
Anibali, et nostris ducibus, regique Molosso
Horum majores, et dorso ferre cohortes,
Partem aliquam belli, et euntem in prælia surriam -- JUV. Sat. xii. 107.
Their elders usde great Hannibal to steed
Our Leaders, and Molossian Kings at need,
And on their backe to bear strong guarding Knights,
Part of the war, and troupes addrest to fights.
A man must needs rest assured of the confidence they had in these beasts, and of their
discourse, yielding the front of a battle unt o them; where the least stay they could have
made, by reason of their hugenesse and weight of their bodies, and the least amazement
that might have made them turn head upon their own men, had bin sufficient to lose all.
And few examples have been noted that ever it fortuned they turned upon their owns
troupes, whereas we head-long throng one upon another, and so are put to rout. They had
charge given them, not only of one simple moving, but of many and severall parts in the
combat. As the Spaniards did to their dogges in their new conquest of the Indias, to whom
they gave wages and imparted their booties, which beasts showed as much dexteritie in
pursuing and judgement in staying their victory, in charging or retreating, and, as
occasion served, in distinguishing their friends from their enemies, as they did
earnestnesse and eagerness. We rather admire and consider strange than common things,
without which I should never so long have amused my self about this tedious
catalogue. For, in my judgement, he that shall meerly check what we ordinarily see in
those beasts that live amongst us shall in them flnde as wonderful effects as those which
with so much toile are collected in far countries and passed ages. It is one same nature
which still does keep her course. He that throughly should judge her present estate might
safely conclude both what shall happen and what is past. I have seen amongst us men
brought by sea from distant countries, whose language, because we could in no wise
understand, and that their fashions, their countenance, and their clothes did altogether
differ from ours, who of us did not deem them brutish and savage? Who did not impute
their mutenesse into stupidity or beastlines, and to see them ignorant of the French
tongue, of our kissing the hands, of our low-lowting courtesys, of our behaviour and
carriage, by which without contradiction, humane nature ought to take her patterne?

Whatsoever seems strange unto us, and we understand not, we blame and condemne.
The like befalleth us in our judging of beasts. They have diverse qualities, which
somewhat simbolize witih ours, from which we may comparatively draw some conjecture,
but of such as are peculiar unto them what know we what they are? Horses, dogges, oxen,
sheepe, birds, and the greater number of sensitive creatures that live amongst us, know our
voice, and by it suffer themselves to be directed. So did the lamprey which Crassus had,
and came to him when he called it: so do the eeles that breed in Arethusa’s fountains. And
my self have seen some fish-ponds where at a certain crie of those that kept them, the
fish would presently come to shoare, where they were wont to be fed.
------ nomen habent, et ad magistri
Vocem quisque sui venit citatus. -- MART. iv. Epig. XXX. 6.
They have their proper Dames, and every one
Comes at his master’s voice, as call’d upon.
By which we may judge and conclude that elephants have some apprehension of
religion, forasmuch as after diverse washings and purifications, they are seen to lift up
their truncke as we do our arms, and at certain hours of the day, without any
instruction, of their own accord, holding their eyes fixed towards the sunne-rising, fall
into a long meditating contemplation; yet, because we see no such appearance in other
beasts, may we rightly conclude that they are altogether void of religion, and may not
take that ill payment which is hidden from us. As we perceive something in that action
which the Philosopher Cleanthes well observed, because it somewhat draws near unto
ours. He saw (as himself reporteth) a company of emmets go from their nest, bearing
amongst them the body of a dead ant, toward another emmets nest, from which many
other ants came, as it were to meet them by the way to parly with them, who after they had
continued together awhile, they which came last, returned backe to consult (as you may
imagine) with their fellow-citizens, and because they could hardly come to any
capitulation, they made two or three voyages to and fro. In the end, the last come brought
unto the other a worme from their habitation, as for a ransome of the dead, which worme
the first company took upon their backes, and carried it home, leaving the dead body
unto the other. See, here the interpretation that Cleanthes gave it: Witnessing thereby that
those creatures which have no voice at all, have nevertheless mutual commerce and
interchangable communication, whereof if we be not partakers, it is only our fault; and
therefore do we fondly to censure it. And they yet produce diverse other effects, far
surpassing our capacity, and so far out of the reach of our mutation that even our
thoughts are unable to conceive them. Many hold opinion that in the last and famous sea-
fight which Antonie lost against Augustus, his admiral-galley was in her course staied by
that little fish the Latines call Remora, and the English a Suck-stone, whose property is to
stay any ship he can fasten himself unto. And the Emperor Caligula, sailing with a great
fleet along the coast of Romania, his own galley was suddenly staied by such a fish,
which he caused to be taken sticking fast to the keele, moodily raging that so little a

creature had the power to force both sea and winde, and the violence of all his oares, only
with her bil sticking to his galley ( for it is a kind of shellfish) and was much more
amazed when he perceived the fish being brought aboord his ship to have no longer that
powerfull virtue which it had being in the sea. A certain citizen of Cyzicum, whilom
purchased unto himself the reputation to be an excellent mathematician, because he had
learnt the quality of the hedge-hogge, whose property is to build his hole or denne open
diverse waies, and toward severall winds, and fore-seeing rising stormes, he presently
stoppeth the holes that way, which thing the foresaid citizen heedfully observing, would in
the City foretell any future storm, and what wind should blow. The cameleon taketh the
colour of the place wherein he is. The fish called a pourcontrell, or manie-feet, changeth
him self into what colour he lists as occasion offereth itself, that so he may hide
himself from what he feareth, and catch what he seeketh for. In the cameleon it is a
change preceding of passion, but in the pourcontrell a change in action; we ourselves do
often change our colour and alter our countenance through sudden fear, choler, shame,
and such like violent passions, which are wont to alter the hew of our faces, but it is by the
effect of sufferance, as in the cameleon. The jaundise has power to make us yelow, but it
is not in the disposition of our wils. The effects we perceive in other creatures, greater
than ours, witness some more excellent faculty in them, which is concealed from us; as it
is to be supposed diverse others of their conditions and forces are, whereof no appearance
or knowledge commeth to us. Of all former predictions, the ancientest and most certain
were such as were drawen from the flight of birds; we have nothing equall unto it, nor so
admirable. The rule of fluttering, and order of shaking their wings, by which they
conjecture the consequences of things to ensue, must necessarily be directed to so noble
an operation by some excellent and supernaturall meane. For it is a wresting of the letter
to attribute so wondrous effects to any natural decree, without the knowledge, consent, or
discourse of him that causeth and produces them, and is a most false opinion, which to
prove, the torpedo or cramp-fish has the property to benumme and astonish, not only the
limbs of those that touch it, but also theirs that with any long pole or fishing line touch any
part thereof, she does transmit and convey a kind of heavy numming into the hands of
those that stir or handle the same. Moreover, it is averred that if any matter be cast upon
them the astonishment is sensibly felt to gain upward, until it come to the hands, and
even through the water it astonisheth the feeling-sence. Is not this a wonderful power?
Yet is it not altogether unprofitable for the Cramp-fish, she both knowes and makes use of
it: for to catch prey she pursueth, she is seen to hide herself under the mud, that, other
fishes swimming over her, strucken and benumbed with her exceeding coldnesse, may
fall into her clawes. The Cranes, swallowes, and other wandering birds, changing their
abode according to the seasons of the years, show evidently the knowledge they have of
their fore-divining faculty, and often put the same in use. Hunters assure us that to chose
the best dog, and which they purpose to keep from out a litter of other young whelps,
there is no better meane than the damme herself: for, if they be removed from out their
kennell, him that she first brings thither again shall alwaies prove the best; or if one but
encompasse her kennell with fire, looke which of her whelps she first seeketh to save, is
undoubtedly the best; whereby it appeareth they have a certain use of prognosticating

that we have not; or else some hidden virtue to judge of their young ones, different and
more lively than ours. The manner of all beasts breeding, engendering, nourishing,
working, moving, living, and dying, being so near to ours, what ever we abridge from
their moving causes, and adde to our condition above theirs can no way depart from our
reasons discourse. For a regiment of our health, Physitians propose the example of bats
manner of life and proceeding unto us: for this common saying is alwaies in the people’s
mouth:
Tenez chauds les pieds et la teste,
Au demeurant vivez en beste. -- JOUB. Err. Pop. pur. ii. 140.
Keep warme (’tis meete) the head and feete:
In all the rest, live like a beast.
Generation is the chiefest natural action: we have a certain disposition of some
members fittest for that purpose; nevertheless, they bid us range ourselves unto a brutish
situation and disposition, as most effectuall:
------ more ferarum,
Quadrupedumque maqis ritu, plerumque putantur
Concipere uxores: quia sic loca sumere possunt,
Pectoribus positis, sublatis semina lumbis. -- LUCR. iv. 1256.
And reject those indiscreet and insolent motions which women have so luxuriously
found out, as hurtful: conforming them to the example and use of beasts of their sex, as
more modest and considerate.
Nam mulier prohibet se concipere, atgue repugnat,
Clunibus ipse viri Venerem si læta retractet,
Atque exposato ciet omni pectore fluctus,
Et enim sulci recta regione viaque
Vomerem, atque locis avertit seminis ictum. -- LUCR. iv. 1260.
If it be justice to give every one his due, beasts which serve, love, and defend their
benefactors, pursue and outrage strangers, and such as offend them, by so doing they
represent some show of our justice, as also in reserving a high kind of equality in
dispensing of what they have to their young ones. Touching friendship, without all
comparison, they professe it more lively and show it more constantly than men. Hircanus,
a dog of Lysimachus the King, his master being dead, without eating or drinking, would
never come from off his bed, and when the dead corps was removed thence he followed it,
and lastly flung himself into the fire where his master was burned. As did also the dogge
of one called Pyrrhus, who after he was dead would never budge from his masters couch,

and when he was removed suffered himself to be carried away with him, and at last flung
himself into the fire wherein his master was consumed. There are certain inclinations of
affection which, without counsell of reason, arise sometimes in us, proceeding of a casual
temerity, which some call sympathie: beasts as well as men are capable of it. We see
horses take a kind of acquaintance one of another, so that often, traveling by the highway
or feeding together, we have much ado to keep them asunder; we see them bend and
applie their affections to some of their fellowes colours, as if it were upon a certain
visage: and when they meet with any such, with signes of joy and demonstration of good
will to joine and accost them, and to hate and shunne some other formes and colours.
Beasts as well as we have choice in their loves, and are very nice in chusing of their
mates. They are not altogether void of our extreme and unappeasable jealousies. Lustfull
desires are either natural and necessary as eating and drinking; or else natural and not
necessary, as the acquaintance of males and females; or else neither necessary nor
natural: of this last kind are almost all mens, for they are all superfluous and artificiall. It
is wonderful to see with how little nature will be satisfied, and how little she has left for
us to be desired. The preparations in our kitchens do nothing at al concede her laws. The
Stoics say that a man might very well sustain himself with one olive a day. The
delicacy of our wines is no part of her lesson, no more is the surcharge and relishing
which we adde unto our letcherous appetites.
-----neque illa
Magno prognatum deposcit console cunnum. -- HOR. Ser. i. Sat. ii. 30.
These strange lustfull longings which the ignorance of good, and a false opinion, have
possest us with, are in number so infinite that in a manner they expell all those which are
natural, even as if there were so many strangers in a city that should either banish and
expell all the natural inhabitants thereof, or utterly suppresse their ancient power and
authority, and absolutely usurping the same, take possession of it. Brute beastes are much
more regulare than we, and with more moderation containe themselves within the
compasse which nature has prescribed them; but not so exactly but that they have some
coherency with our riotous licenciousnesse. And even as there have been found, certain
furious longings and unnaturall desires which have provoked men unto the love of beasts,
so have diverse times some of them been drawn to love us, and are possessed with
monstrous affections from one kind to another: witness the elephant that in the love of an
herb-wife, in the city of Alexandria, was corivall with Aristophanes the Grammarian, who
in all offices pertayning to an earnest woer and passionate suiter yielded nothing unto
him; for, walking through the fruit-market, he would here and there snatch up some with
his truncke, and carry them unto her: as near as might be he would never loose the sight
of her, and now and then over her hand put his truncke into her bosome, to feel her
breasts. They also report of a dragon that was exceedingly in love with a young maiden,
and of a goose in the city of Asope which dearely loved a young child; also of a ram that
belonged to the musitian Glausia. Do we not daily see munkies ragingly in love with
women, and furiously to pursue them? And certain other beasts given to love the males

of their own sex? Oppianus and others report some examples to show the reverence and
manifest the awe some beasts in their marriages bear unto their kindred; but experience
makes us often see the contrary:
-----nec habetur turpe juvencæ
Ferre patrem tergo: tua filia coniux:
Quasque creavit, init pecudes caper: ipsaque cuius
Semine concepta est, ex illo conecepit ales -- OVID. Metam. x. 325.
To bear her Sire the Heifer shameth not:
The Horse takes his own Fillies maiden-head:
The Goat gets t hem with young whom he begot:
Birds bred by them, by whom themselves were bred.
Touching a subtil pranke and witty tricke, is there any so famous as that of Thales the
philosopher’s mule, which, laden with salt, passing through a river chanced to stumble, so
that the sacks she carried were all wet, and perceiving the salt (because the water had
melted it to grow lighter, ceased not, as seen as she came near any water, together with
her load, to plunge herself therein, until her master, being aware of her craft,
commanded her to be laden with wooll, which being wet became heavier; the mule
finding herself deceived, used her former policy no more. There are many of them that
lively represent the visage of our avarice, who with a greedy kind of desire endeavor to
surprise whatsoever comes within their reach, and though they reap no commodity, nor
have any use of it, to hide the same very curiously. As for husbandry, they exceed us, not
only in fore-sight to spare and gather together for times to come, but have also many
parts of the skill belonging thereunto. As the ants, when they perceive their corne to grow
mustie and graine to be sowre, for fear it should rut and putrifie, spread the same abroad
before their nests, that so it may aire and drie. But the caution they use in gnawing, and
prevention they employ in paring their graines of wheat, is beyond all imagination of
mans wit: Because wheat does not alwaies keep drie nor wholesome, but moisten, melt,
and dissolve into a kind of whey, namely, when it beginneth to bud, fearing it should turn
to seed, and lose the nature of a storehouse, for their sustenance, the part and gnaw off the
end whereat it wonts to bud. As for war, which is the greatest and most glorious of all
humane actions, I would faine know if we will use it for an argument of some prerogative,
or otherwise for a testimony of our imbecility and imperfection, as in truth the science
we use to defeat and kill one another, to spoile and utterly to overthrow our own kind, it
seems it has not much to make itself to be wished for in beasts, that have it not.
------ quando leoni
Fortior eripuit ritam leo, quo nemore unquam
Expirarit aper maioris dentibus apri? -- JUVEN. Sat. xv. 160.

When has a greater Lion damnifide
A Lions life? in what wood ever di’de,
A boare by tusks and gore,
Of any greater boare?
Yet are not they altogether exempted from it witness the furious encounters of Bees,
and the hostile enterprises of the Princes and Leaders of the two contrary Armies.
----- sæpe duobus
Regibus incessit magno discordia motu,
Continuoque animos vulgi et trepidantia bello
Corda licet longe præsciscere. -- VIRG. Georg. iv. 67.
Oft-times twixt two so great Kings great dissention
With much adoe does set them at contention;
The vulgare mindes strait may you see from far,
And hearts that tremble at the thought of war.
I never marke this divine description but me thinkes I read humane foolishnesse and
worldly vanity painted in it. For these motions of war, which out of their horror and
astonishment breed this tempest of cries and clang of sounds in us:
Fulgur ubi ad cælum se tollit, totaque circum
Ære renidescit tellus, subterque virum vi
Excitur pedibus sonitus, clamoreque montes
Icti rejectant voces ad sidera mundi: -- LUCR. ii. 326.
Where lightning raiseth itself to the skies,
The earth shines round with armour, soundes do rise
By mens force under feet, wounded with noyse
The hilles to heav’n reverberate their voice.
This horror-causing array of so many thousands of armed men, so great fusion, earnest
fervor, and undaunted courage, it would make one laugh to see by how many vain
occasions it is raised and set on fire, and by what light means it is again suppressed and
extinct.
----- Paridis propter narrator amorem
Græcia Barbariæ diro collisa duello. -- HOR. i. Epist. ii. 6.
For Paris lustfull love (as Stories tell)
All Greece to direfull war with Asia fell.

The hatred of one man, a spight, a pleasure, a familiar suspect, or a jealousie, causes
which ought not to move two scolding fish-wives to scratch one another, is the soul and
motive of all this hurly-burly. Shall we believe them that are the principal authors and
causes therof? Let us but hearken unto the greatest and most victorious Emperor that
ever, was, how pleasantly he laughs and wittily he plaies at so many battells and bloody
fights, hazarded by both sea and land, at the blood and lives of five hundred thousand
soules which followed his fortune, and the strength and riches of two parts of the world
consumed and drawne drie for the service of his enterprise:
Quod futuit Glaphyran Antonius, hanc mihi poenam
Fulvia constituit, se quoque uti futuam
Fulviam ego ut furuam? quid si me Manius oret
Pædicam, faciam? non puto, si sapiam.
Aut futue, aut pugnemus, ait: quid si mihi vita
Charior est ipsa mentula? Signa canant. -- MART, xi. Epig. xxi.
(I use my Latine somewhat boldly, but it is with that leave which you have given me.)
This vast huge body has so many faces and severall motion, which seem to threat both
heaven and earth.
Quam multi Lybico volvuntur marmore fluctus,
Sævus ubi Orion hybernis conditur undis.
Vel cum sole novo densæ torrentur aristæ,
Aut Hermi campo, aut Lyciæ flaventibus arvis,
Scuta sonant, pulsuque pedum tremit excita tellus. -- VIRG. Æn. vii. 717.
As many waves as rowle in Affricke marble bounds,
When fierce Orion hides in Winter waves his head:
Or when thicke-ears of Corne are parch’t by Sunne new-spred.
In Hermus fruitfull fields, or Lycæs yellow grounds,
With noyse of shields and feet, the trembling earth so sounds.
’This many-headed, diverse-armed, and furiously-raging monster, is man, wretched, weake
and miserable man; whom, if you consider well, what is he but a crawling and ever-
moving ants-nest?’
It nigrum campis agmen: -- VIRG, Æn.. iv. 404.
The sable-coloured band,
Marches along the Land.

A gust of contrary winds, the croking of a flight of Ravens, the false pase of a horse,
the casual flight of an Eagle, a dream, a sodaine voice, a false signe, a mornings mist, an
evenings fogge, are enough to overthrow, sufficient to overwhelme and able to pull him to
the ground. Let the Sunne but shine hot upon his face, he faints and swelters with heat:
cast but a little dust in his eyes, as to the Bees mentioned by our Poet, all our ensignes, all
our legions, indeed great Pompey himself, in the forefront of them is overthrowne and put to
rout. (For as I remember it was he whom Sertorius vanquished in Spain, with all those
goodly arms.) This also served Eumenes against Antigonus, and Surena against Crassus:
Hi motus animorum, atque hæc certamina tanta,
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent. -- VIRG. Georg. iv. 86, 87.
Their stomacke-motions, these contentions great,
[Calm’d] with a little dust, strait lose their heat.
Let us but uncouple some of our ordinary flies, and let loose a few gnats amongst them,
they shall have both the force to scatter and courage to consume him. The Portugals not
long since beleagring the City of Tamly, in the territory of Xiatine, the inhabitants thereof
brought great store of hives (whereof they have plentie) upon their walls; and with fire
drove them so forcible upon their enemies, who, as unable to abide their assaults and
endure their stingings, left their enterprize. Thus by this new kind of help was the liberty
of the town gained and victory purchased; with so happy success, that in their retreating
there was not one townes-man found wanting. The soules of Emperours and Coblers are
all cast in one same mould. Considering the importance of Princes actions, and their
weight, we persuade ourselves they are brought forth by some weighty and important
causes; we are deceived: They are moved, stirred and removed in their motions by the
same springs and wards that we are in ours. The same reason that makes us chide and
braule and fall out with any of our neighbors, causeth a war to follow betweene
Princes; the same reason that makes us whip or beat a lackey maketh a Prince (if he
apprehend it) to spoyle and waste a whole Province. They have as easy a will as we, but
they can do much more. Alike desires perturbe both a skinne-worme and an Elephant.
Touching trust and faithfulnesse, there is no creature in the world so trecherous as man.
Our histories report the earnest pursuit and sharpe chase that some dogges have made for
the death of their masters. King Pirrhus, finding a dog that watched a dead man, and
understanding he had done so three days and nights together, commanded the corps to be
enterred and took the dog along with him. It fortuned one day, as Pirrhus was surveying
the general musters of his army the dog perceiving in that multitude the man who had
murthered his maister, loud-barking and with great rage ran furiously upon him; by which
signes he furthered and procured his maisters revenge, which by way of justice was
shortly executed. Even so did the dogge belonging to Hesiodus, surnamed the wise,
having convicted the children of Canister of Naupactus of the murther committed on his
Masters person. Another Dogge being apointed to watch a Temple in Athens, having

perceived a sacrilegious theefe to carrie away the fairest jewels therein, barked at him so
long as he was able, and seeing he could not awaken the Sextons or temple-keepers,
followed the theefe whither-soever he went; daie-light being come, he kept himself a
loof-off, but never lost the sight of him: if he offered him meat, he utterly refused it; but if
any passenger chanced to come by, on them he fawned, with wagging his tail, and took
what-ever they offered him; if the theefe staied to rest himself, he also staied in the same
place. The news of this Dogge being come to the Temple-keepers, they as they went
along, enquiring of the Dogs hair and colour, pursued his tracke so long that at last they
found both the Dog and the theefe in the City of Cromyon, whom they brought backe to
Athens, where for his offence he was severely punished. And the judges in
acknowledgement of the Dogges good office, at the Cities charge appointed him for his
sustenance a certain daily measure of Corne, and enjoyned the Priests of the Temple,
carefully to looke unto him. Plutarke affirmeth this story to be most true, and to have
hapned in his time. Touching gratitude and thankfulnesse (for me thinks we have need to
further this word greatly), this only example shall suffice, of which Appion reporteth to
have been a spectator himself. One day (says he) that the Senate of Rome (to please and
recreate the common people) causd a great number of wild beasts to be baited, namely
huge great Lions, it so fortuned that there was one amongst the rest, who by reason of his
furious and stately carriage, of his unmatched strength, of his great limbs, and of his loud
and terror-causing roaring, drew all bystanders eyes to gaze upon him. Amongst other
slaves, that in sight of all the people were presented to encounter with these beasts, there
chanced to be one Androclus of Dacia, who belonged unto a Roman Lord who had been
Consull. This huge Lion, having eyed him afar off, first made a suddaine stop, as strucken
into a kind of admiration, then with a mild and gentle contenance, as if he would
willingly have taken acquaintance of him), fair and softly approached unto him: Which
done, and resting, assured he was the man he took him for, begun fawningly to wagge his
tail, as dogges do that fawne upon their newfound masters, and licke the poore and
miserable slaves hands and thighs, who through fears was almost out of his wits and halfe
dead. Androclus at last taking hart of grace, and by reason of the Lions mildness having
rouzed up his spirits, and wishly fixing his eyes upon him, to see whether he could call him
to remembrance, it was to all beholders a singular pleasure to observe the love, the joy,
and blandishments each endevored to enter-show one another. Whereat the people raising
a loud crie, and by their shouting and clapping; of hands seeming to be much pleased, the
Emperor willed the slave to be brought before him, as desirous to understand of him the
cause of so strange and seld-seen an accident, who related this new and wonderful story
unto him.
My Master (said he) being Proconsull in Affrica, forasmuch as he caused me every day
to be most cruelly beaten, and held me in so rigorous bondage, I was constrained, as being
wearie of my life, to run away; and safely to scape from so eminent a person, and who had
so great authority in the Countrie, I thought it best to get me to the desart and most
unfrequented wildernesses of that region, with a full resolution, if I could not compasse
the means to sustain my self, to find one way or other, with violence to make myself
away. One day the Sunne about noone-tide became extremely hote, and the scorching heat

thereof intolerable, I fortuned to come unto a wild unhauted cave, hidden amongst crags
and almost inaccessible, and where imagined no footing had ever been; therein I hid
myself. I had not long been there but in comes this Lion, with one of his pawes sore hurt,
and bloody-goared, wailing for the smart, and groaning for the pain he felt; at whose
arrivall I was much dismaied, but he seeing me lie close-cowering in a corner of his den,
gently made his approaches unto me, holding forth his goared paw toward me and seemed
with shewing the same humbly to sue and suppliantly to beg for help at my hands. I,
moved with ruth, taking it into my hand, pulled out a great splint which was gotten into it,
and shaking off all fear, first I wrung and crusht his sore, and caused the filth and matter,
which therein was gathered, to come forth; then, as gently as for my heart I could, I
cleansed, wiped, and dried the same. He feeling some ease in his grief, and his pain to
cease, still holding his foot betweene my hands, began to sleep and take some rest. Thence
forward he and I lived together the full space of three years in his den, with such meat as
he shifted-for; for what beasts he killed, or what prey soever he took, he ever brought
home the better part and shared it with me, which for want of fire I rotted in the Sunne,
and therewith nourished my self all that while. But at last, wearied with this kind of
brutish life, the Lion being one day gone to purchase his wonted prey, I left the place,
hoping to mend my fortunes, and having wandred up and down three dayes, I was at last
taken by certain soldiers, which from Africa brought me into this City to my Master
again, who immediately condemned me to death, and to be devoured by wild beasts.
And as I now perceive, the same Lion was also shortly after taken, who as you see has
now requited me of the good turn I did him, and the health which by my means he
recovered. Behold here the historie Androclus reported unto the Emperor, which after he
caused to be declared unto all the people, at whose general request he was forthwith set at
liberty, and quit of his punishment, and by the common consent of all had the Lion
bestowed upon him. Appion says further, that Androclus was daily seen to lead the Lion
up and down the streets of Rome, tied only with a little twine, and walking from taverne
to taverne, received such money as was given him, who would gently suffer himself to be
handled, touched, decked, and strowed with flowers, all over and over, many saying when
they met him: ’Yonder is the Lion that is the mans hoste, and yonder is the man that is the
Lions Physitian.’ We often mourne and weepe for the loss of those beasts we love, so do
they many times for the loss of us.
Post bellator equus positis insiqnibus Æthon
It lacrimans, guttisque humectat grandibus ora. -- VIRG. Æn. xi. 89.
Next Æthon horse of war, all ornaments laid down,
Goes weeping, with great drops bedewes his cheeckes adowne.
As some of our nations have wives in common and some in severall, each man keeping
himself to his own, so have some beasts; yet some there are that observe their marriage
with as great respect as we do ours. Touching the mutual societie and reciprocall
confederation which they devise amongst themselves, that so they may be fast combined

together, and in times of need help one another, it is apparant that if Oxen, Hogs, and
other beasts, being hurt by us, chance to crie, all the heard runnes to aid him, and in his
defense will joine all together. The fish, called of the Latines Scarus, having swallowed
the fishers hook, his fellowes will presently flocke about him, and nible the line in sunder;
and if any of them happen to be taken in a bow-net, some of his fellowes, turning his head
away, will put his tail in at the neck of the net, who with his teeth fast-holding the same,
never leave him until they have pulled him out. The Barbel fishes, if one of them chance
to be engaged, will set the line against their backes, and with a fin they have, toothed like
a sharp saw, presently saw and fret the same asunder. Concerning particular offices, which
we for the benefit of our life draw one from an other, many like examples are found
amongst them. It is assuredly beleeved that the Whale never swimmeth unless she have a
little fish going before her as her vantgard; it is in shape like a Gudgeon, and both the
Latines and we call it the Whale-guide; for she does ever follow him, suffering herself as
easily to be led and turned by him as the ship is directed and turned by a stern: for
requitall of which good turn, whereas all things else, be it beast, fish, or vessell, that
comes within the horrible Chaos of this monstrous mouth, is presently lost and devoured,
this little fish does safety retire himself therein, and there sleepes very quietly, and as
long as he sleepes the Whale never stirs; but as soone as he awaketh and goeth his way,
wherever he takes his course she alwaies followeth him, and if she fortune to lose him, she
wanders here and there, and often striketh upon the rocks, as a ship that has nor mast nor
rudder. This Plutarke witnesseth to have seen in the Iland of Anticyra. There is such a like
societie betweene the little bird called a Wren and the Crocodill; for the Wren serveth as a
sentinell to so great a monster: And if the Ichneumon, which is his mortal enemy,
approach to fight with him, the little birdlet, lest he might surprise him whilst he sleepeth,
with his singing, and pecking him with his bill, awakens him, and gives him warning of
the danger he is in. The bird liveth by the scraps, and feedeth upon the leavings of that
monster, who gently receiveth him into his mouth, and suffers him to pecke his jawes and
teeth for such mamokes of flesh as sticke betweene them: and if he purpose to close his
mouth, he does first warne him to be gone, fair and easy closing it by little and little,
without any whit crushing or hurting him. The shell-fish called a nacre liveth even so with
the pinnotere, which is a little creature like unto a crabfish, and as his porter or usher waits
upon him, attending the opening of the nacre, which he continually keepes gaping until he
see some little fish enter in, fit for their turn, then he creepes into the nacre, and leaves
not pinching his quick flesh until he makes him close his shell, and so they both
together, fast in their hold, devour their prey. In the manner of the tunnies life may be
discovered a singular knowledge of the three parts of the mathematikes. First for
astrologie, it may well be said that man does learne it of them: for wherever the winter
Solstitium does take them, there do they stay themselves, and never stir till the next
Equinoctium, and that is the reason why Aristotle does so willingly ascribe that art unto
them: then for geometric and arithmetike, they alwaies frame their shole of a cubike
figure, every way square: and so form a solid close and well-ranged battalion,
encompassed round about of six equall sides. Thus orderly marshaled, they take their
course and swim whither their journey tends, as broad and wide behind as before: so that

he that seeth and telleth but one rank, may easily number all the troope, forasmuch as the
number of the depth is equall unto the bredth, and the bredth unto the length. Touching
magnanimity and haughtie courage, it is hard to set it forth more lively, and to produce a
rarer patterne than that of the dog which from India was sent unto Alexander: to whom
was first presented a stag, then a wild boare, and then a bear, with each of which he
should have fought, but he seemed to make no accompt of them, and would not so
much as remove out of his place for them; but when he saw a lion, he presently rouzed
himself, shewing evidently he meant only so noble a beast worthie to enter combat with
him. Concerning repentance and acknowledging of faults committed, it is reported that an
elephant, having, through rage of choler, slain his governour, conceived such an extreme
inward grief that he would never afterward touch any food, and suffered himself to pine
to death. Touching clemencie, it is reported of a tiger (the fiercest and most inhumane
beast of all having a kid given her to feed upon, endured the force of gnawing hunger two
days together rather than she would hurt him; the third day with main strength she broke
the cage wherein she was kept pent, and went elsewhere to shift for feeding; as one
unwilling to seize upon the seelie kid, her familiar and guest. And concerning privileges
of familiaritie and sympathie caused by conversation, is it not oft seen how some make
cats, dogs, and hares so tame, so gentle, and so mild, that, without harming one another,
they shall live and continue together? But that which experience teacheth sea-faring men,
especially those that come into the seas of Sicilie, of the quality and condition of the
Halcyon bird, or as some call it alcedo or kings-fisher, exceeds all mens conceit. In what
kinds of creature did ever nature so much prefer both their hatching, sitting, brooding, and
birth? Poets faine that the Iland of Delos, being before wandring and fleeting up and
down, was for the delivery of Latona made firme and setled; but Gods decree has been
that all the watrie wildernesse should be quiet and made calm, without raine, wind, or
tempest, during the time the Halcyon sitteth and bringeth forth her young ones, which is
much about the winter Solstitium, and shorteest day in the yeare: by whose privilege even
in the hart and deadest time of xinter we have seven calme days, and as many nights to
saile without any danger. Their hens know no other cocke but their own: they never
forsake him all the days of their life; and if the cocke chance to be weake and crazed, the
hen will take him upon her neck and carrie him with her wherever she goeth, and serve
him even until death. Mans wit could never yet attaine to the full knowledge of that
admirable kind of building or structure which the Halcyon useth in contriving of her neast,
no, nor devise what it is of.
Plutarke, who has seen and handled many of them, thinkes it to be made of certain
fish-bones, which she so compacts and conjoyneth together, enterlacing some long and
some crosse-waise, adding some foldings and roundings to it, that in the end she frameth a
round kind of vessel, readie to float and swim upon the water: which done, she carrieth the
same where the sea waves beat most; there the sea gently beating upon it, shewes her how
to daube and patch up the parts not well closed, and how to strengthen those places and
fashion those ribs that are not fast, but stir with the sea waves: and on the other side, tha t
which is closely wrought, the sea beating on it, does so fasten and conjoyne together, that
nothing, no, not stone or yron, can any way loosen divide, or break the same except with

great violence and what is most to be wondred at is the proportion and figure of the
concavitie within; for it is so composed and proportioned that it can receive or admit no
manner of thing but the bird that built it; for to all things else it is so impenetrable, close,
and hard, that nothing can possibly enter in: no, not so much as the sea water. See here a
most plaine description of this building or construction taken from a very good author:
yet me thinks it does not fully and sufficiently resolve us of the difficultie in this kind of
architecture. Now from what vanity can it proceed, we should so willfully contemne and
disdainfully interpret those effects, which we can neither imitate nor conceive? But to
follow this equalitie or correspondences betweene us and beasts somewhat further: the
privilege whereof our soul vants, to bring to her condition whatsoever it conceiveth, and
to despoile what of mortal and corporall qualities belongs unto it, to marshall those things
which she deemed worthie her acquaintance, to disrobe and deprive their corruptible
conditions, and to make them leave as superfluous and base garments, thicknesses, length,
depth, weight, colour, smell, roughnesse, smoothnesse, hardnesse, softnesse, and all
sensible accidents else, to fit and appropriate them to her immortall and spirituall
condition: so that Rome and Paris, which I have in my soul; Paris which I imagine; indeed,
I imagine and conceive the same without reatnesse and place, without stone and morter.
and without wood; then say I unto my self, the same privilege seems likewise to be in
beasts: for a horse accustomed to hear the sound of trumpets, the noyse of shot, and the
clattering of arms, whom we see to snort, to startle, and to neigh in his sleep, as he lies
along upon his litter, even as he were in the hurly burly; it is most certain, that in his
mind he apprehends the sound of a drum without any noyse, and an army without arms
or body.
Quippe videbis equos fortes, cum membra jacebunt
In somnis, sudare tamen, spirareque sæpe,
Et quasi de palma summas contendere vires. -- LUCR. iv. 982.
You shall see warlike horses, when in sleep
Their limbs lie, yet sweat, and a snorting keep.
And stretch their utmost strength,
As for a goale at length.
That hare which a grey-bound imagineth in his dreame, after whom as he sleepeth we
see him bay quest, yelp, and snort, stretch out his tail, shake his legs, and perfectly
represent the motions of his course the same is a hare without bones, without hair.
Venantumque canes in molli sæpe quiete,
Iactant crura tamen subito, vocesque repente
Mittunt, et crebras redducunt naribus auras,
Ut vestigia si teneant inventa ferarunt
Expergefactique, sequuntur inania sæpe,

Cervorum simulacra, fugæ quasi dedita cernant:
Donec discussis redeant erroribus ad se. -- LUCR. iv. 986
Oft times the hunters dogs in easy rest
Stir their legs, suddainly, open, and quest,
And send from nosthrils thicke-thicke snuffing sent
As if on traile they were of game full-bent:
And wakened so, they follow shadowes vain
Of Deere in chase, as if they fled amaine:
Till, their fault left, they turn to sense again.
Those watching-dogs which in their sleep we sometimes see to grumble, and then
barking, to startle suddainly out of their slumber, as if they perceived some stranger to
arive, that stranger which their mind seems to see is but an imaginarie man, and not
perceived, without any dimension, colour, or being:
-----Consueta domi catulorum blanda propago
Degere, sæpe levem ex oculis volucremque soporem
Discutere, et corpus de terra corripere instant
Proinde quasi ignotas facies atque ora tuantur. -- Ib. 993.
The fawning kind of whelps, at home that liv’s,
From eyes to shake light-swift sleepe often striv’s,
And from the ground their starting bodies hie,
As if some unknown stranger they did spie.
Touching corporall beauties before I go any further it were necessarie I know whether
we are yet agreed about her description. It is very likely that we know not well what
beautie either in nature or in general is, since we give so many and attribute so diverse
formes to humane beauties indeed, and to our beautie: Of which if there were any natural or
lively description, we should generally know it, as we do the heat of fire. We imagine
and faine her formes, as our fantasies lead us.
Turpis Romano Belgicus ore color. -- PROPERT. ii. Eleg. xviii. 26.
A Dutch-froes colour has no grace,
Seen in a Roman Ladies face.
The Indians describe it blacks and swarthy, with blabbered-thick lips, with a broad and
flat nose, the inward gristle whereof they loade with great gold rings, hanging down to
their mouth, and their neather lips with great circlets beset with precious stones, which
cover all their chins, deeming it an especiall grace to show their teeth to the roots. In Peru,

the greatest ears are ever esteemed the fairest, which with all art and industrie they are
continually stretching out; and a man (who yet liveth) sweareth to have seen in a Province
of the East Indias the people so careful to make them great, and so to load them with
heavy jewels, that with ease he could have thrust his arm through one of their eare-holes.
There are other Nations who endeavor to make their teeth as blacke as jeat, and skorne to
have them white; and in other places they die them red. Not only in the province of
Baske, but in other places, women are accounted fairest when their heads are shaven, and
which is strange, in some of the Northerly frozen-countries, as Plinie affirmeth. Those of
Mexico esteems the littlenesse of their foreheads as one of the chiefest beauties, and
whereas they shave their hair over all their body besides, by artificiall means they
labor to nourish and make it grow only in their foreheads; and so love to have great
dugs, that they strive to have their children sucke over their shoulders. So would we set
forth ilfavordnesse. The Italians proportion it big and plum; the Spaniards spynie and
lanke; and amongst us one would have her white, another browne, and soft and delicate,
another strong and lustie; some desire wantonnesse and blithnesse, and othersome
sturdinesse and majestie to be joined with it. Even as the preheminence in beauties which
Plato ascribeth unto the Sphericall figure, the Epicureans refer the same unto the
Piramidall or Square; and say they cannot swallow a God made round like a bowle. But
however it is, nature has no more privileged us in that than in other things, concerning
her common laws. And if we impartially enter into judgement with ourselves, we shall
find that if there be any creature or beast less favoured in that than we, there are others
(and that in great numbers) to whom nature has been more favourable than to us. A multis
animalibus decore vincimur: (SEN. Epist. cxxiv.) ’We are excelled in comelinesse, by
many living creatures’: Yea, of terrestriall creatures that live with us. For, concerning
those of the Sea, omitting their figure, which no proportion can containe, so much does it
differ, both in colour, in neatnesse, in smoothnesse, and in disposition, we must give place
unto them: which in all qualities we must likewise do to the eyrie ones. And that
prerogative which Poets yield unto our upright stature, looking towards heaven whence
her beginning is,
Pronaque cum spectent animalia cætera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, cælumque videre
Iussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus, -- OVID. Metam. 1. i. 84.
Where other creatures on earth looke and lie,
A loftie looke God gave man, had him prie
On heav’n, rais’d his high countenance to the skie,
is meerely poeticall, for there are many little beasts that have their sight dire ctly, fixed
towards heaven: I find the Camels and the Estridges necke much more raised and upright
than ours. What beasts have not their face aloft and before, and looke not directly opposite
as we; and in their natural posture descrie not as much of heaven and earth as man does?
And what qualities of our corporall constitution, both in Plato and Cicero, cannot fit and

serve a thousand beasts? Such as most resemble man are the vilest and filthiest of all the
rout: As for outward apparance and true shape of the visage, it is the Munkie or Ape:
Simia quam similis, turpissima bestia, nobis! -- Cic. Nat. Deor. i. Enni.
An Ape, a most il-favored beast,
How like to us in all the rest? ’
as for inward and vital parts, it is the Hog. Truely, when I consider man all naked (indeed, be
it in that sex which seems to have and challenge the greatest share of eye-pleasing
beautie) and view his defects, his natural subjection, and manifold imperfections, I find
we have had much more reason to hide and cover our nakednesse than any creature else.
We may be excused for borrowing those which nature had therein favored more than us,
with their beauties to adorn us, and under their spoiles of wooll, of hair, of feathers, and
of silke to shroud us. Let us moreover observe, that man is the only creature whose wants
offend his own fellowes, and he alone that in natural actions m ust withdraw and
sequester himself from those of his own kind. Verely it is an effect worthie
consideration, that the skilfullest masters of amorous dalliaunce appoint for a remedie of
venierian passions a free and full survay of the body, which one longeth and seeks after:
and that to coole the longing and aswage the heat of friendship, one need but perfectly
view and thoroughly consider what he loves.
Ille quod obscænas in aperto corpore partes
Viderat, in cursu qui f uit, ha sit amor. -- OVID. Rem. Am. ii. 33
The love stood still, that ran in full cariere,
When bare it saw parts that should not appeare.
And although this remedie may perhaps proceed from a squeamish and cold humor, yet it
is a wonderful signe of our imbecillitie that the use and knowledge should so make us to
be cloyd one of an other. It is not bashfulness so much as art and foresight makes our
Ladies so circumspect and unwilling to let us come into their closets before they are fully
readie and throughly painted, to come abroad and show themselves:
Nec veneres nostras hoc fallit, quo magis ipsæ
Omnia summopere hos vitæ post scænia celant,
Quos retinere volunt adstrictoque esse in amore. -- LUCR. iv. 1176.
Our Mistresses know this, which makes them not disclose
Parts to be plaid within, especially from those
Whom they would servants hold, and in their love-bands close:

Whereas, in other creatures there is nothing but we love and pleaseth our senses: so that
even from their excrements and ordure we draw not only dainties to eat, but our richest
ornaments and perfumes. This discourse of beautie toucheth only our common order, and
is not so sacrilegious as it intendeth or dareth to comprehend those divine, supernaturally
and extraordinarie beauties which sometimes are seen to shine amongst as, even as stars
under a corporall and terrestriall veile. Moreover, that part of natures favors which we
impart unto beasts, is by our own confession much more advantageous unto them. We
assume unto ourselves imaginarie and fantastic goods, future and absent goods, which
humane capacitie can no way warrant unto herself; or some other, which by the
overweening of our own opinion we falsely ascribe unto ourselves; as reason, honor,
and knowledge; and to them as their proper share we leave the essentiall, the manageable,
and palpable goods, as peace, rest, securitie, innocencie, and health: I say, which is the
goodliest and richest present nature can impart unto us. So that even Stoike Philosophie
dareth to affirme, that if Heraclitus and Pherecydes could have changed their wisdom
with health, and by that means the one to have rid himself of the dropsie and the other
of the lowsie-evil, which so sore tormented them, they would surely have done it:
whereby they also yield so much more honor unto wisdom by comparing and
counterpeizing the same unto health, than they do in this other proposition of theirs, where
they say, that if Circe had presented Vlisses with two kinds of drinke, the one to turn a
wise man into a foole, the other to change a foole into a wise man, he would rather have
accepted that of folly, than have been pleased that Circe should transforme his humane
shape into a beaste. And they say that Wisdome herself would thus have spoken unto
him: ’Meddle not with me, but leave me rather than then shouldst place me under the
shape and body of an Asse.’ What? This great and heavenly wisdom? Are Phylosophers
contented then to quit it for a corporall and earthly veile? Why then it is not for reasons
sake, nor by discourse and for the soul, we so much excel beasts: it is for the love we
bear unto our beautie, unto our fair hew, and goodly disposition of limbs, that we reject
and set our understanding at naught, our wisdom, and what else we have. Well, I allow of
this ingenious and voluntarie confession surely they knew those parts we so much labor
to pamper to be meere fantasies. Suppose beasts had all the virtue, the knowledge, the
wisdom and sufficiency of the Stoics, they should still be beasts; nor might they ever be
compared unto a miserable, wretched, and senseless man. For, when all is done,
whatsoever is not as we are, is not of any worth. And God to be esteemed of us, must (as
we will show anon) draw somewhat near it. Whereby it appeareth that it is not long of a
true discourse, but of a foolish hardinesse and self-perfuming obstinacy, we prefer
ourselves before other creatures, and sequester ourselves from their condition and
societie. But to return to our purpose: we have for our part inconstancie, irresolution,
uncertaintie, sorrow, superstition, carefulnesse for future things (indeed after our life),
ambition, covetousnesse, jelousie, envie, inordinate, mad, untamed appetites, war,
falsehood, disloyaltie, detraction, and curiosity. Surely we have strangely overpaid this
worthie discourse, whereof we so much glory, and this readinesse to judge, or capacitie to
Know, if we have purchased the same with the price of so infinite passions to which we
are uncessantly enthralled. If we be not pleased (as Socrates is) to make this noble

prerogative over beasts, to be of force, that whereas nature has subscribed them certain
seasons and bounds for their natural lust and voluptuousness, she has given us at all
howers and occasions the full reines of them. Ut vinum ægrotis, quia prodest raro, nocet
sæpissime, melius est non adhibere omnino, quam, spe dubiæ salutis, in apertam
perniciem incurrere: Sic, ha ud scio, an melius fuerit humano generi motum motum
celerem cogitationis, acumen, solertiam quam rationem vocamus, quoniam pestifera sint
multis, admodum paucis salutaria, non dari omnino, quam tam munifice et tam large dari:
(CIC. Nat. Deor. iii. c. 27.) ’As it is better not to use wine at all in sicke persons, because
it seldom does them good, but many times much hurt, than in hope of doubtfull health to
run into undoubted danger; so do I not knowe whether it were better that this swift
motion of the thought, this sharpenesse this conceitednesse which we call reason, should
not at all be given to mankind (because it is pernicious unto many and healthfull to very
few) than that it should be given so plentifully and so largely.’ What good or commoditie
may we imagine this far-understanding of so many things brought ever unto Varro and to
Aristotle? Did it ever exempt, or could it at any time free them from humane
inconveniences? Were they ever discharged of those accidents that incidently follow a
seelie labouring man? Could they ever draw any ease for the gout from logike? And
howbeit they knew the humor engendering the same to lodge in the joints, have they felt
it the less? Did they at any time make a covenant with death, although they knew full
well that some nations rejoice at her coming? as also of cuckoldship, because they knew
women to be common in some countries? But contrariwise having both held the first
rank in knowledge, the one amongst the Romans, the other among the Greeks, indeed, and
at such times wherein sciences flourished most, we could never learne they had any
speciall exce llencie in their life. We see the Græcian has been put to his plunges in
seeking to discharge himself from some notable imputations in his life. Was it ever found
that sensualitie and health are more pIeasing unto him that understands Astrologie and
Grammar?
(Illiterate num minus nervi rigent? -- HOR. Epod. viii. 17.
As stiffe unlearned sinnewes stand,
As theirs that much more understand.)
or shame and povertie less importunate and vexing?
Scilicet et morbis, et de bilitate carebis,
Et luctum, et curam et tempora vitæ
Longa tibi posthæc fato meliore dabuntur. -- JUVEN. Sat. xiv. 166.
Thou shall be from disease and weaknesse free,
From moan, from care, long time of life to you
Shall by more friendly fate affoorded be.

I have in my days seen a hundred artificers, and as many labourers, more wise and
more happy than some sectors in the Universitie, and whom I would rather resemble. Me
thinks learning has a place among st things necessarie for mans life, as glory,
noblenesse, dignitie, or at most as riches, and such other qualities, which indeed stead the
same; but afar off and more in conceipt than by Nature. We have not much more need of
offices, of rules, and laws how to live in our commonwealth than the cranes and ants
have in theirs. Which notwithstanding, we see how orderly and without instruction they
maintaine themselves. If man were wise he would value everything according to its worth,
and as it is either more profitable or more necessarie for life. He that shall number us by
our actions and proceedings, shall doubtlesse find many more excellent ones amongst the
ignorant than among the wiser sort: I meane in all kind of vertues. My opinion is, that
ancient Rome brought forth many men of much more valor and sufficiencie, both for
peace and war, than this late learned Rome, which with all her wisdom has
overthrowne her erst-flourishing estate. If all the rest were likewise, then should honestie and
innocencie at least belong to the ancient, for she was exceedingly well placed with
simplicities. But I will shorten this discourse, which perhaps would draw me further than I
would willingly follow: yet thus much I will say more, that only humility and submission
is able to make a perfect honest man. Every one must not have the knowledge of his dutie
referred to his own judgement, but ought rather to have it prescribed unto him, and not be
allowed to chose it at his pleasure and free will: otherwise, according to the imbecility of
our reasons, and infinite varietie of our opinions, we might perhaps forge and devise
such duties unto ourselves, as would induce us (as Epicurus says) to endeavor to destroy
and devoure one another. The first law that ever God gave unto man was a law of pure
obedience. It was a bare and simple commandement whereof man should enquire and
know no further: forasmuch as to obey is the proper dutie of a reasonable soul,
acknowledging a heavenly and superiour benefactor. From obeying and yielding unto
him proceed all other vertues, even as all sinnes derive from self-overweening.
Contrariwise, the first temptation that ever seized on human nature was disobedience, by
the devils instigation, whose first poison so far insinuated itself into us, by reason of the
promises he made us of wisdom and knowledge: Eritis sicut Dii scientes bonum et
malum: (Gen. iii. 5.) ’You shall be like Gods, knowing both good and evil.’ And the
Syrens, to deceive Vllysses, and alluring him to fall into their dangerous and confounding
snares, offer to give him the full fruition of knowledge. The opinion of wisdom is the
plague of man. That is the occasion why ignorance is by our religion recommended unto
us as an instrument fitting beleefe and obedience: Cavete, ne quis vos decipiat per
Philosophiam et inanessseductiones, secundum elementa mundi: (Col. ii. 8.) ’Take heed
lest any man deceive you by Philosophie and vain seducements, according to the
rudiments of the world.’ All the Philosophers of all the sects that ever were do generally
agree in this point, that the chiefest felicitie, or summum bonum, consisteth in the peace
and tranquillitie of the soul and body: but where shall we find it?
Ad summum sapiens uno minor est Iove, dives;
Liber, honoratus, pulcher, Rex denique Regum:

Præcipue sanus, nisi cum pituita molesta est. -- HOR. i. Epist. i. 106.
In summe, who wise is known,
Is less than Jove alone,
Rich, honorable, free, fair, King of Kings,
Chiefely in health, but when fleagme trouble brings.
It seems verily that nature for the comfort of our miserable and wretched condition
has allotted us no other portion but presumption. It is therefore (as Epictetus says) that
man has nothing that is properly his own but the use of his opinions. Our hereditarie
portion is nothing but smoke and wind. The Gods (as says Philosophie) have health in
true essence, and sicknesse in conceipt. Man, cleane contrary, possesseth goods in
imagination, and evils essentially. We have had reason to make the powers of our
imagination to be of force: for all our facilities are but in conceipt, and as it were in a
dreame. Heare but this poore and miserable creature vaunt himself. There is nothing
(says Cicero) so delightfull and pleasant as the knowledge of letters; of letters, I say, by
whose means the infinitie of things, the incomprehensible greatness of nature, the
heavens, the earth, and all the seas of this vast universe, are made known unto us. They
have taught us religion, moderation, stowtnesse of courage, and redeemed our soul out of
darknesse, to make her see and distinguish of all things, the high as well as the lowe, the
first as the last, and those betweene both. It is they that store and supply us with all such
things as may make us live happily and well, and instruct us how to pass our time
without sorrow or offence. Seemeth not this goodly orator to speak of the Almighties and
everliving Gods condition? And touching effects, a thousand poore seelie women in a
countrie town have lived and live a life much more reposed, more peaceable, and more
constant than ever he did.
-----Deus ille fuit Deus, inclyte Memmi,
Qui princeps vitæ rationem invenit eam, quæ
Nunc appellatur sapienta, quique per artem,
Fluctibus e tantis vitam tantisque tenebris,
In tam tranquillo et tam clara luce locavit. -- LUCR. v. 8.
Good sir, it was God, God it was, first found
That course of man’s life, which now is renown’d
By name of wisdom; who by art reposed,
Our life in so clear light, calme so composde,
From so great darknesse, so great waves opposed.
Observe what glorious and noble words these be yet but a sleight accident brought this
wisemans understanding to a far worse condition than that of a simple shepherd:
notwithstanding this divine Teacher, and this heavenly wisdom. Of like impudence is the

promise of Democritus his Book, ’I will now speak of all things;’ And that fond title
which Aristotle gives us of mortal gods, and that rash judgement of Chrysippus that Dion
was as vertuous as God: And my Seneca says he acknowledgeth that God has given him
life, but how to live well that he has of himself. Like unto this other: In virtute vere
gloriamur, quod non contingeret, si id donum a Deo non a nobis haberemus: (CIC. Nat.
Deor. iii.) ’We rightly vaunt us of virtue, which we should not do, if we had it of God, not
of ourselves:’ This also is Senecæs, that the wise man has a fortitude like unto Gods; but
in humanity weaknesse wherein he excelleth him. There is nothing more common than to
meet with such passages of temeritie: There is not any of us that will be so much offended
to see himself compared to God as he will deem himself wrong to be depressed in the
rank of other creatures. So much are we more jealous of our own interest than of our
Creators. But we must tread this foolish vanity under foot, and boldly shake off and lively
reject those foolish ridiculous foundations whereon these false opinions are built. So long as
man shall be persuaded to have means or power of himself, so long will he denie and
never acknowledge what he oweth unto his Master: he shall alwaies (as the common
saying is) make shift with his own: He must be stripped unto his shirt. Let us consider
some notable example of the effect of Philosophie. Possidonius having long time been
grieved with a painfull-lingring diseease which with the smarting pain made him wring
his hands and gnash his teeth, thought to scorne grief with exclaiming and crying out
against it: ’Doe what you list, yet will I never say that you are evil or pain.’ He feeleth
the same passions that my lackey does, but he boasteth himself that at least he conteineth
his tongue under the laws of his sect. Re succumbere non oportebat verbis gloriantem;
(CIC. Tusc. Qu. ii. c. 25.) ’It was not for him to yield in deeds, who had so braved it in
words.’ Arcesilas lying sicke of the gowt, Carneades coming to visit him, and seeing
him to frowne, supposing he had been angrie, was going away again, but he called him
back, and shewing him his feet and breast, said unto him, ’There is nothing come from
thence hither. This has somewhat a better garb;’ for he feeleth himself grieved with
sicknesse, and would faine be rid of it, yet is not his heart vanquished or weakned thereby,
the other stands upon his stifnesse (as I fear) more verball than essentiall And
DionysiusHeracleotes being tormented with a violent smarting in his eyes, was at last
persuaded to quit these Stoice resolutions.
Be it supposed that Learning and Knowledge should work those effects they speak of,
that is, to blunt and abate the sharpnesse of those accidents or mischances that follow and
attend us; does she any more than what ignorance effecteth much more evidently and
simply? The Philosopher Pyrrho being at sea, and by reason of a violent storme in great
danger to be cast away, presented nothing unto those that were with him in the ship to
imitate but the securitie of an Hog which was aboard, who, nothing at all dismaied,
seemed to behold and outstare the tempest. Philosophie after all her precepts gives us over
to the examples of a Wrestler or of a Muletier, in whom we ordinarily perceive much less
feeling of death, of pain, of grief, and other conveniences, and more undaunted
constancy, than ever Learning or Knowledge could store a man withall, unless he were
born and of himself through some natural habitude prepared unto it. What is the cause
the ten der members of a child or limbs of a horse are much more easy and with less

pain cut and incised than ours, if it be not ignorance? How many, only through the power
of imagination, have falne into dangerous diseases? We ordinarily see diverse that will
cause themselves to be let blood, purged, and dieted, because they would be cured of
diseases they never felt but in conceit; when essentiall and true maladies faile us, then
Science and Knowledge lend us hers: This colour or complexion (said she) presageth
some rheumatike defluxion will ensue you: This soultring-hot season menaceth you with
some febricant commotion; this cutting of the vital line of your left hand warneth you of
some notable and approaching indisposition. And at last she will roundly addresse herself
unto perfect health; saying this youthly vigor and suddain joy cannot possibly stay in one
place, her blood and strength must be abated, for fear it turn you to some mischief.
Compare but the life of a man subject to these like imaginations, unto that of a day-
laboring swaine, who followes his natural appetites, who measureth all things only by
the present sense, and has neither learning nor prognostications, who feeleth no disease
but when he has it: whereas the other has often the stone imaginarily before he have it in
his reines: as if it were not time enough to endure the sicknesse when it shall come, he
does in his fancie prevent the same, and headlong runneth to meet with it. What I speak
of Physicke, the same may generally be applied and drawne to all manner of learning.
Thence came this ancient opinion of those Philosophers who placed chief felicitie in the
knowledge of our judgements weaknesse. My ignorance affords me as much cause of
hope as of fear: and having no other regiment for my health than that of other men’s
examples, and of the events I see elsewhere in like occasions whereof I find some of all
sorts: and rely upon the comparisons that are most favourable unto me. I embrace health
with open arms, free, plaine, and full, and prepare my appetite to enjoy it, by how much
more it is now less ordinary and more rare unto me: so far is it from me that I, with the
bitternesse of some new and forced kind of life, trouble her rest and molest her ease.
Beasts do manifestly declare unto us how many infirmities our mindes agitation brings us.
That which is told us of those that inhabit Bresill, who die only through age, which some
impute to the clearnesse and calmnenesse of their aire, I rather ascribe to the calmenesse
and clearnesse of their mindes, void and free from all passions, cares, toiling, and
unpleasant labours, as a people that pass their life in a wonderful kind of simplicitie and
ignorance, without letters, or laws and without Kings or any Religion. Whenc comes it
(as we daily see by experience) that the rudest and grossest clownes are more tough,
strong, and more desired in amorous executions; and that the love of a Muletier is often
more accepted than that of a perfumed quaint courtier? But because in the latter the
agitation of his mind does so distract, trouble, and wearie the force of his body, as it also
troubleth and wearieth itself, who does belie, or more commonly cast the same down
even into madnesse, but her own promptitude, her point, her agilitie, and, to conclude, her
proper force? Whence proceeds the subtilest folly but from the subtilest wisdom? As
from the extremest friendships proceed the extremest enmities and from the soundest
healths the mortallest diseases, so from the rarest and quickest agitations of our mindes
ensue the most distempered and outrageous frenzies. There wants but half a pegs turn to
pass from the one to the other. In mad mens actions we see how fitlie folly suteth and
meets with the strongest operations of our mind. Who knowes not how unperceivable the

neighbourhood between folly with the liveliest elevations of a free mind is, and the
effects of a supreme and extraordinarie virtue. Plato affirmeth that melancholy mindes are
more excellent and disciplinable; so are there none more inclinable unto folly. Diverse
spirits, are seen to be overthrowne by their own force and proper nimblenesse. What a
start has one (T ORQUATO T ASSO ) of the most judicious, ingenious, and most fitted
under the air of true ancient poesie, lately gotten by his own agitation and self-
gladnesse, above all other Italian Poets that have been of a long time? Hath not he
wherewith to be beholding unto this his killing vivacitie? unto this clearnesse that has so
blinded him? unto his exact and far-reaching apprehension of reasons which has made
him voide of reason? unto the curious and laborious pursute of Sciences, that have brought
him unto sottishnesse? unto this rare aptitude to the exercises of the mind, which has
made him without mind or exercise? I rather spited than pitied him when I saw him at
Ferrara, in so piteous a plight, that he survived himself; misacknowledging both
himself and his labours, which unwitting to him, and even to his face, have been
published both uncorrected and maimed. Will you have a man healthy, will you have him
regular, and in constant and safe condition? overwhelme him in the darke pit of idlenesse
and dulnesse. We must be besotted ere we can become wise, and dazzled before we can be
led. And if a man shall tell me that the commoditie to have the apptite cold to griefes and
wallowish to evils, draws this incommoditie after it, it is also consequently the same that
makes us less sharpe and greedie to the enjoying of good and of pleasures: It is true but
the misery of our condition beareth that we have not so much to enjoy as to shun, and that
extreme voluptuousness does not so much pinch us as a light smart: Segnius homines
bona quam mala sentiunt: (TIT. LIV. xxx. c. 21.) ’Men have a duller feeling of a good
turn than of an ill;’ we have not so sensible a feeIing of perfect health as we have of the
least sicknesse,
-----pungit
In cute vix sumnma violatum plagula corpus
Quando valere nihil quemquam movet. Hoc juvat unum
Quod me non torquet latus aut pes; cætera quisquam
Vix queat aut sanum sese aut sentire valentem.
A light stroke that dooth scarce the top-skin wound,
Greeves the gall’d body, when in health to be,
Does scarce move any: only ease is found.
That neither side nor foot tormenteth me:
Scarce any in the rest can feel he’s sound.
Our being in health is but the privation of being ill. See therefore where the sect of
Philosophie that has most preferred sensualitie, has also placed the same but to
indolencie or unfeeling of pain. To have no infirmitie at all is the chiefest possession of
health that man can hope for (as Ennius said)

Nimium boni est, cui nihil est mali.
He has but too much good,
Whom no ill has withstood.
For the same tickling and pricking which a man does feel in some pleasures, and seems
beyond simple health and indolencie, this active and moving sensualitie, or as I may terme
it, itching and tickling pleasure, aymes but to be free from pain, as her chiefest scope.
The lust-full longing which allures us to the acquaintance of women seekes but to expell
that pain which an earnest and burning desire does possesse us with, and desires but to
allay it thereby to come to rest and be exempted from this fever; and so of others. I say
therefore, that if simplicitie directeth us to have no evil, it also addresseth us according to
our condition to a most happy estate. Yet ought it not to be imagined so dull and heavy
than the altogether senselesse. And Crantor had great reason to withstand the
unsensiblenesse of Epicurus, if it were so deeply rooted that the approching and birth of
evils might gainsay it. I commend not that unsensiblenesse which is neither possible nor to
be desired. I am well pleased not to be sicke, but if I be, I will know that I am so; and if I
be cauterized or cut, I will feel it. Verily, he that should root out the knowledge of evil
should therewithall extirp the knowledge of voluptuousness, and at last bring man to
nothing.Istud nihil dolere, non sine magna mercede contingit immanitatis in animo,
stuporis in corpore: (CIC. Tusc. Qu. iii.) ’This very point, not to be offended or grieved
with any thing, befals not freely to a man without either inhumanitie in his mind or
senselesnesse in his body.’ Sicknesse is not amiss unto man, coming in her turn; nor is
he alwaies to shun pain, nor ever to follow sensualitie. It is a great advantage for the
honor of ignorance that Science itself throwes us into her arms when she findes her
self busie to make us strong against the assaults of evils: she is forced to come to this
composition: to yield us the bridle, and give us leave to shrowd ourselves in her lap, and
submit ourselves unto her favor, to shelter us against the assaults and injuries of fortune.
For what meaneth she else when she perswades us to withdraw our thought from the evils
that possesse us, and entertains them with foregon pleasures, and stead us as a comfort of
present evils with the remembrance of forepast felicities, and call a vanished content to
our help, for to oppose it against that which vexeth us? Levationes, ægritudinum in
avocatione a cogitanda molestia, et revocatione ad contemplandas voluptates ponit.
(Ibid.)’Eases of grief she reposeth either in calling from the thought of offence, or calling
to the contemplations of some pleasures.’ Unless it be that where force fails her, she will
use policy and show a tricke of nimblenesse and turn away, where the vigor both of her
body and arms shall faile her. For not only to a strict Philosopher, but simply to any
setled man, when he by experience feeleth the burning alteration of a hot fever, what
currant paiment is it to pay him with the remembrance of the sweetness of Greeke wine?
It would rather empaire his bargaine.
Che ricordarsi il ben doppia la noia.

For to think of our joy,
Redoubles our annoy.
Of that condition is this other counsell, which Philosophie gives only to keep forepast
felicities in memories and thence blot out such griefes as we have felt: as if the skill to
forget were in our power: and counsell of which we have much less regard:
Suavis est laborum præteritorum memoria. -- CIC. Fin. ii. Eurip.
Of labours overpast,
Remembrance has sweet taste
What? shall Philosophie, which ought to put the weapons into my hands to fight against
Fortune; which should harden my courage, to suppress and lay at my feet all humane
adversities, will she so faint as to make me like a fearfull cunnie creepe into some lurking-
hole, and like a craven to tremble and yield? For memory representeth unto us, not what
we chuse, but what pleaseth her. Nay, there is nothing so deeply imprinteth anything in
our remembrance as the desire to forget the same: it is a good way to commend to the
keeping, and imprinteth anything in our mind, to solicit her to lose the same. And that is
false, Est situm in nobis, ut et adversa quasi perpetua oblivione obruamus, et secunda
jucunde et suaviter meminerimus: (CIC. Fin. Bon. i.) ’This is engraffed in us, or at least in
our power, that we both burie in perpetuall oblivion things past against us, and record
with pleasure and delight what soever was for us.’
And this is true, Memini etiam quæ nolo; oblivisci non possum quæ volo: (Plu. In vita
Them.) ’I remember even those things I would not; and can not forget what I would.’ And
whose counsell is this? his, Qui se unus sapientem profiteri sit ausus: ’Who only durst
professe himself a wise man’
Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes
Præstrinæit stellas, exortas uti ætheriusSol. -- LUCR. iii. 1086
Who from all mankind bare for wit the prize,
And dim’d the stars as when skies Sunne does rise.
To empty and diminish the memory, is it not the readie and only way to ignorance?
Iners malorum remedium ignorantia est. -- SEN. Oed. act iii. sc. 1.
Of ills a remedie by chance,
And very dull is ignorance.

We see diverse like precepts, by which we are permitted to borrow frivolous
appearances from the vulgar sort, where lively and strong reason is not of force sufficient:
alwaies provided they bring us content and comfort. Where they can not cure a sore they
are pleased to stupifie and hide the same. I am persuaded they will not denie me this, that
if, they could possibly add any order or constancy to a mans life, that it might thereby be
still maintained in pleasure and tranquillitie, by or through any weaknesse or infirmitie of
judgement, but they would accept it.
------ potare, et spargere flores
Incipiam, patiarque vel inconsultus haberi. -- HOR. i. Epist. v. 14.
I will begin to strew flowers, and drinke free,
And suffer witlesse, thriftlesse, held to be.
There should many Philosophers be found of Lycas his opinion: This man in all other
things being very temperate and orderly in his demeanors, living quietly and contentedly
with his families wanting of no dutie or office both towards his own houshold and
strangers, very carefully preserving himself from all hurtful things: notwithstanding
through some alteration of his senses or spirits, he was so possessed with this fantastic
conceipt or obstinate humor that he ever and continually thought to be amongst the
Theatres, where he still saw all manner of spectacles, pastimes, sports and the best
Comedies of the world. But being at last by the skill of Physitians cured of this maladie,
and his offending humor Purged, he could hardly be held from putting them in suite, to
the end they might restore him to the former pleasures and contents of his imagination.
----- pol me occidistis amici,
Non servastis, ait, cui sic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vim menti gratissimus error. -- HOR. i. Epist. ii. 138.
You have not sav’d me, friends, but slain me quite,
(Quoth he) from whom so reft is my delight;
And error purg’d, which best did please my spright.
Of a raving like unto that of Thrasilaus, son unto Pythodorus, who verily beleeved
that all the ships that went out from the haven of Pyræus, indeed all such as came into it,
did only travell about his business, rejoycing when any of them had made a fortunate
voyage, and welcommed them with great gladnesse: His brother Crito, having caused him
to be cured and restored to his better senses, he much bewailed and grieved of the
condition wherein he had formerly lived in, such joy, and so void of all care and grief. It
is that which that ancient Greeke verse says: That not to be so advised brings many
commodities with it:

’Εν τω φρονειν γαρ ηδεν ηδιοτος βιος -- SOPH. Aia. Flag.
The sweetest life I wis,
In knowing nothing is.
And as Ecclesiastes witnesseth: ’In much wisdom is much sorrow. And who getteth
knowledge purchaseth sorrow and grief’ Even that which Philosophy does in general
tearmes allow, this last remedy which she ordaineth for all manner of necessities; that is,
to make an end of that life which we cannot endure. Placet? pare: placet? quacunque vis
exi. Pungit dolor? vel fodiat sane: si nudus es, da jugulum: sin tectus armis vulcaniis, id
est, fortitudine, resiste: (CIC. Tusc. Qu. 1. ii.) ’Does it like you? obey: does it not like you?
get out as you will; does grief pricke you? and let it pierce you too: if you be naked, yield
your throat: but if you be covered with the armour of Vulcan, that is, with fortitude,
resist.’ And that saving, used of the Græcians in their banquets, which they aply unto it,
Aut bibat, aut abeat: (CIC. Ib. v.) ’Either let him carouse, or carry him out of the house:’
which rather fitteth the mouth of a Gascoine, who very easily does change the letter B into
V, than that of Cicero:
Vivere si recte nescis, discede peritis:
Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti:
Tempus abire tibi est, largius æquo
Ridat, et pulset lascivia descentius ætas: -- HOR. ii. Epist. ii. ult.
Live well you cannot, them that can, give place;
Well have you sported, eaten well, drunke well:
’Tis time you part; lest wanton youth with grace
Laugh at, and knock you that with swilling dwell.
what is it but a confession of his insufficiency, and a sending one backe not only to
ignorance, there to be shrowded, but unto stupidity itself, unto unsensiblenesse and not
being?
------ Democritum postquam matura vetustas
Admonuit memorem, motus lanquescere mentis.
Sponte sua letho caput obvius obtu lit ipse. -- LUCR. iii. 1083.
When ripe age put Democritus in mind,
That his mindes motions fainted, he to find
His death went willing, and his life resign’d.
It is that which Anthisthenes said, that a man must provide himself either of wit to
understand or of a halter to hang himself: And that which Chrysippus alleged upon the

speech of the Poet Tyrtaius,
De la virtue, ou de mort approcher. -- PLUT. in Solon’s Life.
Or virtue to approch,
Or else let death incroch.
And Crates said that love was cured with hunger, if not by time; and in him that liked
not these two means, by the halter. That Sextius, to whom Seneca and Plutarke give so
much commendation, having given over all things else and betaken himself to the study
of Philosophy, seeing the progress of his studies so tedious and slow, purposed to cast
himself into the Sea; Ranne unto death for want of knowledge: Reade here what the law
says upon the subject. If perhaps any great inconvenience happen, which cannot be
remedied, the haven is not far-off, and by swimming may a man save himself out of his
body, as out of a leaking boat: for it is fear to die, and not desire to live, which keepes a
foole ioyned to his body. As life through simplicity becommmeth more pleasant, so (as I
erewhile began to say) becomes it more innocent and better. The simple and the
ignorant (says St. Paul) raise themselves up to heaven, and take possession of it; whereas
we, with all the knowledge we have plunge ourselves down to the pit of hell. I rely
neither upon Valentian (a professed enemy to knowledge and learning), nor upon Licinius
(both Roman Emperours), who named them the venime and plague of all politike estates:
Nor on Mahomet, who, as I have heard, does utterly interdict all manner of learning to his
subjects. But the example of that great Lycurgus and his authority, ought to bear chief
sway and the reverence of that divine Lacedemonian policy, so great, so admirable, and so
long time flourishing in all virtue and felicity without any institution or exercise at all of
letters. Those who return from that new world which of late has been discovered by the
Spaniards, can witness unto us how those nations, being without Magistrates or law, live
much more regularly and formally than we, who have amongst us more officers and laws
than men of other professions or actions.
Di citatorie piene e di libelli,
D’essamine, e di carte, di procure
Hanno mani e il seno, e gran fastelli
Di chiose, di consioli e di letture,
Per cui le faculta de’ poverelli
Non sono mai ne le citta sicure,
Hanno dietro e dinanzi e d’ambi i lati,
Notai, pro curatori, e advocate. -- ARIOSTO, cant. xiv. stan. 84.
Their hands and bosoms with writs and citations,
With papers, libels, proxies, full they bear,
And bundels great of strict examiunations,

Of glosses, counsels, readings here and there.
Whereby in townes poore men of occupations
Possesse not their small goods secure from fear,
Before, behind, on each sides Advocates,
Proctors, and Notaries hold up debates.
It was that which a Roman Senator said, that ’their predecessors had their breath
stinking of garlike, and their stomacke perfumed with a good, conscience:’ and contrary,
the men of his time outwardly smelt of nothing but sweet odours, but inwardly they stunke
of all vices: which, in mine opinion, is as much to say they had much knowledge and
sufficiency, but great want of honesty. Incivility, ignorance, simplicity, and rudenesse are
commonly joined with innocency. Curiosity, subtility, and knowledge are ever followed
with malice: Humility, fear, obedience, and honesty (which are the principal instruments
for the preservation of humane society) require a single docile soul and which presumeth
little of herself: Christians have a peculiar knowledge how curiosity is in a man a
natural and originall infirmity. The care to increase in wisdom and knowledge was the
first overthrow of man-kind: is the way whereby man hat h headlong cast himself
down into eternall damnation. Pride is his loss and corruption: it is pride that misleadeth
him from common waies; that makes him to embrace all new fangles, and rather chuse to
be chief of a straggling troupe and in the path of perdition, and be regent of some
erroneous sect, and a teacher of falsehood, than a disciple in the schoole of truth, and
suffer himself to be led and directed by the hand of others in the ready beaten highway. It
is perhaps that which the ancient Greeke proverb implieth
η δειοιδαιονια, χαθαπερ παερι τω τυφω πειθεται, ’Superstition obaieth pride as a
father.’ Oh overweaning, how much doest you hinder us? Socrates being advertised that
the God of wisdom had attributed the name of wise unto him, was thereat much
astonished, and diligently searching and rouzing up himself, and ransacking the very
secrets of his heart, found no foundation or ground for this divine sentence. He knew some
that were as just, as temperate, as valiant and as wise as he, and more eloquent, more fair
and more profitable to their country. In fine he resolved that he was distinguished from
others, and reputed wise, only because he did not so esteeme himself: And that his God
deemed the opinion of science and wisdom a singular sottishnes in man; and that his best
doctrine was the doctrine of ignorance, and simplicitie his greatest wisdom. The sacred
wrote pronounceth them to be miserable in this world that esteeme themselves. ’Dust and
ashes,’ says he, ’what is there in you you should so much glory of?’ And in another
place God has made man like unto a shadowe, of which who shall judge when, the light
being gone, it shall vanish away? Man is a thing of nothing. So far are our faculties from
conceiving that high Deitie, that of our Creators works, those bear his marke best, and
are most his own, which we understand least. It is an occasion to induce Christians to
believe, when they chance to meet with any incredible thing, that it is so much the more
according unto reason, by how much more it is against humane reason. If it were
according unto reason, it were no more a wonder; and were it to be matched, it were no
more singular. Melius scitur Deus nesciendo, ’God is better knowen by our not knowing

him,’ says S. Augustine: and Tacitus, Sanctius est ac reverentius de actis deorum credere
quam scire: ’It is a course of more holinesse and reverence to hold beleefe than to have
knowledge of Gods actions.’ And Plato deemes it to be a vice of impiety overcuriously to
enquire after God, after the world, and after the first causes of things. Atque illum quidem
parentem hujus universitatis invenire, difficile; et quum jam inveneris, indicare in vulgus,
nefas:/2 ’Both it is difficult to find out the father of this universe, and when you have
found him, it is unlawfull to reveale Him to the vulgar,’ says Cicero. We easily pronounce
puissance, truth, and justice; they be words importing some great matter, but that thing we
neither see nor conceive. We say that God feareth, that God will be angry, and that God
loves.
Immortalia mortali sermone notantes, -- LUCR. v. 122.
Who with tearmes of mortality
Note things of immortality.
They be all agitations and motions, which according to our forms can have no place in
God, nor we imagine them according to his. It only belongs to God to know himself and
interpret his own workes; and in our tongues he does it improperly, to descend and come
down to us, that are and lie groveling on the ground. How can wisdom (which is the
choice betweene good and evil) beseeme him, seeing no evil does touch him? How
reason and intelligence, which we use to come from obscure to apparant things, seeing
there is no obscure thing in God? Justice, which distributeth unto every man what belongs
unto him, created for the society and conversation of man, how is she in God? How,
temperance, which is the moderation of corporall sensualities, which have no place at all
in his God-head? Fortitude patiently to endure sorrowes, and labours and dangers,
appertaineth little unto him, these three things no way approaching him, having no accesse
unto him. And therefore Aristotle holds him to be equally exempted from virtue and from
vice. Neque gratia, neque ira teneri pote st, quod quæ talia essent, imbecilla essent
omnia: (CIC. Nat. Deor. i.) ’Nor can he be possessed with favor and anger; for, all that is
so is but weake.’ The participation which we have of the knowledge, of truth, what soever
she is, it is not by our own strength we have gotten it; God has sufficiently taught it us
in that he has made choice of the simple, common, and ignorant to teach us His
wonderful secrets. Our faith has not been purchased by us: it is a gift proceeding from
the liberality of others. It is not by our discourse or understanding that we have received
our religion, it is by a forreine authority and commandement. The weaknesse of our
judgement helps us more than our strength to compasse the same, and our blindnesse more
than our clear- sighted eyes. It is more by the means of our ignorance than of our skill that
we are wise in heavenly knowledge. It is no marvell if our natural and terrestriall means
cannot conceive the supernaturall or apprehend the celestial knowledge. Let us adde
nothing of our own unto it but obedience and subjection: for (as it is written) ’I will
confound the wisdom of the wise, and destroy the understanding of the prudent. Where is
the wise? where is the scribe, where is the disputer of this world? (1 COR. i. 19-21.) has

not God made the wisdom of this world foolishuesse? For seeing the world by wisdom
knew not God, in the wisdom of God, it has pleased Him, by the vanity of preaching, to
save them that believe.’ Yet must I see at last whether it be in mans power to find what
he seekes for: and if this long search, wherein he has continued so many ages, has
enriched him with any new strength or solid truth: I am persuaded, if be speak in
conscience, he will confesse that all the benefit he has gotten by so tedious a pursuit has
been that he has learned to know his own weaknesse. That ignorance which in us was
natural, we have with long study confirmed and averred. It has happened unto those that
are truly learned, as it happens unto ears of corne, which as long as they are empty, grow
and raise their head aloft, upright and stout; but if they once become full and big with
ripe corne, they begin to humble and droope downeward. So men having tried and
sounded all, and in all this chaos and huge heape of learning and provision of so infinite
different things, found nothing that is substantiall, firme, and steadie, but all vanity, have
reno unced their presumption, and too late known their natural condition. It is that which
Velleius upbraids Cotta and Cicero withall, that they have learnt of Philo to have learned
nothing. Pherecydes, one of the seven wise men, writing to Thales even as he was
yielding up the ghost, ’I have,’ says he, ’appoynted my friends, as soon as I shal be layed
in my grave, to bring you all my writings. If they please you and the other sages, publish
them; if not, conceal them. They containe no certainties nor do they any whit satisfie
me. My profession is not to know the truth nor to attaine it. I rather open than discover
things.’ The wisest that ever was, being demanded what he knew, answered, he knew that
he knew nothing. He verified what some say, that the greatest part of what we know is the
least part of what we know not: that is, that that which we think to know is but a parcel,
indeed, and a small particle, of our ignorance. ’We know things in a dreame’ says Plato, ’and
we are ignorant of them in truth.’ Omnes pene veteres nihil cognosci, nihil percipi, nihil
sciri posse dixerunt angustos sensus, imbecilles animos, brevia curricula vitæ: (CIC.
Acad. q. i.) ’Almost all the ancients affirmed nothing may be knowen, nothing perceived,
nothing understood: that our senses, are narrow, our mindes are weake, and the race of
our life is short.’ Cicero himself, who ought all he had unto learning, Valerius says, that
in his age he begun to disesteeme letters: and whilst he practised them, it was without
bond to any speciall body, following what seemed probable unto him, now in the one and
now in the other sect; ever holding himself under the Academies doubtfulnesse.
Dicendum est, sed ita ut nihil affirmem; quæram omnia, dubitans plerumque, et mihi
diffidens: (CIC. Divin. i.) ’Speake I must, but so as I avouch nothing, question all things,
for the most part in doubt and distrust of my self.’ I should have too much a do if I
would consider man after his own fashion, and in grose: which I might do by his own
rule, who is wont to judge of truth, not by the weight or value of voices, but by the
number. But leave we the common people,
Qui vigilans stertit, -- LUCR. iii. 1091.
Who snoare while they are awake.

Mortua cui vita est, prope jam vivo atque videnti: -- Ib. 1089.
Whose life is dead while yet they see,
And in a manner living be.
Who feeleth not himself, who judgeth not himself, who leaves the greatest part of his
natural parts idle. I will take man even in his highest estate. Let us consider him in this
small number of excellent and choice men, who having naturally been endowed with a
peculiar and exquisite wit, have also fostred and sharpened the same with care, with study
and with art, and have brought and strained unto the highest pitch of wisdom it may
possibly reach unto. They have fitted their soul unto all senses, and squared the same to
all byases; they have strengthned and under-propped it with all foraine helpes, that might
any way fit or stead her, and have enriched and adorned her with whatsoever they have
been able to borrow, either within or without the world for her avail: It is in them that
the extreme height of humane nature does lodge. They have reformed the world with
policies and laws. They have instructed the same with arts and sciences, as also by
example of their wonderful manners and life. I will but make accompt of such people, of
their witness and of their experience. Let us see how far they have gone, and what
holdfast they have held by. The maladies and defects which we shall find in that college,
the world may boldly allow them to be his. Whosoever seekes for any thing, commeth at
last to this conclusion and says, that either he has found it, or that it cannot be found, or
that he is still in pursuit after it. All philosophy is divided into these three kindes. Her
purpose is to seek out the truth, the knowledge and the certainty. The Peripatetike, the
Epicureans, the Stoics and others have thought they had found it. These have established
the sciences that we have, and as of certain knowledges have treated of them;
Clitomachus, Carneades, and the Academikes have despaired the finding of it, and judged
that truth could not be conceived by our means. The end of these is weaknesse and
ignorance. The former had more followers and the worthiest sectaries. Pyrrho and other
sceptikes, or epechistes, whose doctrine or manner of teaching many auncient learned men
have thought to have been drawne from Homer, from the seaven wise men, from
Archilochus and Euripides, to whom they join Zeno, Democritus, and Xenophanes, say
that they are still seeking after truth. These judge that those are infinitely deceived who
imagine they have found it, and that the second degree is over boldly vain in affirming
that mans power is altogether unable to attaine unto it. For to establish the measure of our
strength to know and distinguish of the difficulty of things is a great, a notable and
extreme science, which they doubt whether man be capable thereof or no.
Nil sciri quisquis putat, id quoque nescit,
An sciri possit, quo se nil scire fatetur. -- LUCR. iv. 471.
Who thinks nothing is known, knowes not that Whereby he
Grauntes he knowes nothing if it known may be.

That ignorance which knows, judgeth, and condemneth itself, is not an absolute
ignorance: for to be so, she must altogether be ignorant of herself. So that the profession
of the Pyrrhonians is ever to waver, to doubt, and to enquire; never to be assured of any
thing, nor to take any warrant of himself. Of the three actions or faculties of the soul, that
is to say, the imaginative, the concupiscible, and the consenting, they allow and conceive
the two former: the last they hold and defend to be ambiguous, without inclination or
approbation either of one or other side, be it never so light. Zeno in jesture painted forth
his imagination upon this division of the soules faculties: the open and outstretched hand
was apparance; the hand halfe-shut, and fingers somewhat bending, consent; the fist
closed, comprehension: if the fist of the left hand were closely clinched together, it
signified Science. Now this situation of their judgement, straight and inflexible, receiving
all objects with application or consent, leads them unto their Ataraxie, which is the
condition of a quiet and settled life, exempted from the agitations which we receive by the
impression of the opinion and knowledge we imagine to have of things; whence proceed
fear, avarice, envie, immoderate desires, ambition, pride, superstition, love of novelties,
rebellion, disobedience, obstinacy, and the greatest number of corporall evils: indeed, by that
meane they are exempted from the jealousie of their own discipline, for they contend but
faintly: they fear nor revenge nor contradiction in the disputations. When they say that
heavy things descend downward, they would be loth to be beleeved, but desire to be
contradicted, thereby to engender doubt and suspence of judgement, which is their end
and drift. They put forth their propositions but to contend with those they imagine we
hold in our conceipt. If you take theirs, then will they undertake to maintaine the contrary
all is one to them, nor will they give a penny to chuse. If you propose that snow is blacke,
they will argue on the other side that it is white. lf you say it is neither one nor other, they
will maintaine it to be both. If by a certain judgement you say that you cannot tell, they
will maintaine that you can tell. Nay, if by an affirmative axiome you swear that you stand
in some doubt, they will dupute that you doubt not of it, or that you cannot judge or
maintaine that you are in doubt. And by this extremity of doubt, which staggereth itself,
they separate and divide themselves from many opinions, indeed from those which diverse
ways have maintained both the doubt and the ignorance. Why shall it not be granted then
(say they) as to Dogmatists, or Doctrine-teachers, for one to say greene and another
yellow, so for them to doubt? Is there any thing can be proposed unto you, either to allow
or refuse which may not lawfully be considered as ambiguous and doubtfull? And
whereas others be carried either by the custom of their countries or by the institution of
their parents, or by chance, as by a tempest, without choyce or judgement, indeed sometimes
before the age of discretion, to such and such another opinion, to the Stoike or Epicurean
Sect, to which they find themselves more engaged, subjected, or fast tyed, as to a prize
they cannot let go: Ad quamcunque disciplinam, velut Te mpestate, delati, ad eam
tanquam ad saxum adhærescunt: (CIC. Acad. Qu. x.) ’Being carried as it were by a
Tempest to any kind of doctrine, they sticke close to it as it were to a rocke.’ Why shall
not these likewise be permitted to maintaine their liberty and consider of things without
dutie or compulsion? Hoc liberiores et solutiores, quod integra illis, est judicandi
potestatas: (Ibid.) ’They are so much the freer and at liberty, for that their power of

judgement is kept entire.’ Is it not some advantage for one to find himself disengaged
from necessitie which brideleth others: Is it not better to remaine in suspence than to
entangle himself in so many errours that humane fantasia has brought forth? Is it not
better for a man to suspend his own persuasion than to meddle with these sedicious and
quarrellous divisions? What shall I chuse? Mary, what you list, so you chuse. A very
foolish answer: to which it seems nevertheless that all Dogmatisme arriveth; by which it
is not lawfull for you to be ignorant of that we know not. Take the best and strongest
side, it shall never be so sure but you shall have occasion to defend the same, to close and
combat a hundred and a hundred sides? Is it not better to keep out of this confusion? You
are suffered to embrace as your honor and life Aristotles opinion upon the eternitie of the
Soule, and to belie and contradict whatsoever Plato says concerning that; and shall they
be interdicted to doubt of it? If it be lawfull for Panæcius to maintaine his judgement
about auspices, dreames, oracles, and prophecies, whereof the Stoics make no doubt at
all: wherfore shall not a wise man dare that in all things which this man dareth in such as
he has learned of his masters, confirmed and established by the general consent of the
schoole whereof he is a sectary and a professor? If it be a child that judgeth, he wots not
what it is; if a learned man, he is forestalled. They have reserved a great advantage for
themselves in the combat, having discharged themselves of the care how to shroud
themselves. They care not to be beaten, so they may strike again: and all is fish that
comes to net with them. If they overcome, your proposition halteth; if you, theirs is lame;
if they faile, they verifie ignorance; if you, she is verified by you; if they prove that
nothing is knowen, it is very well; if they cannot prove it, it is good likewise: Vt quum in
eadem re paria contrariis in partibus momenta inveniuntur, facilius ab utraque parte
assertio sustineatur; (CIC. Ibid.) ’So as when the same matter the like weight and moment
is found on diverse parts, we may the more easily hold with avouching on both parts.’ And
they suppose to find out more easily why a thing is false than true, and that which is not
than that which is: and what they believe not, than that what they believe. Their manner
of speech is, ’I confirme nothing.’ It is no more so than thus, or neither: I conceive it not;
apparances are every where likewise. The law of speaking pro or contra is all one. ’Nothing
seems true that may not seem false.’ Their sacramental word is επεχω; which is as
much to say as I hold and stir not. Behold the burdens of their songs and other such like.
Theyr effects is a pure, entire, and absolute surceasing and suspence of judgement. They
use their reason to enquire and to debate, and not to stay and choose. Whosoever shall
imagine a perpetuall confession of ignorance, and a judgement upright and without
staggering, to what occasion soever may chance, that man conceives the true Pyrrhonisme.
I expound this fantazy as plaine as I can, because many deem it hard to be conceived:
and the authors themselves represent it somewhat obscurely and diversly. Touching the
actions of life, in that they are after the common sort, they are lent and applied to natural
inclinations, to the impulsion and constraint of passions, to the constitutiones of laws and
customs, and to the tradition of arts: Non enim nos Deus ista scire, sed tantummodo uti
voluit: (Cic. Divin. i.) ’For God would not have us know these things, but only use them.’
By such means they suffer their common actions to be directed without any conceit or
judgement, which is the reason that I cannot well sort unto this discourse what is said of

Pyrrho. They faine him to be stupide and unmovable, leading a kind of wild and
unsociable life, not shunning to be hit with carts, presenting himself unto downefalls,
refusing to conforme himself to the laws. It is an endearing of his discipline. He would
not make himself a stone or a blocke, but a living, discoursing, and reasoning man,
enjoying all pleasures and natural commodities, busying himself with and using all his
corporall and spirituall parts in rule and right. The fantastic and imaginary and false
privileges which man has usurped unto himself to sway, to appoint, and to establish, he
has absolutely renounced and quit them. Yet is there no Sect but is enforced to allow her
wise Sectary, in chief to follow diverse things nor comprehended, nor perceived, nor
allowed, if he will live. And if he take shipping, he follows his purpose, not knowing
whether it shall be profitable or no: and yieldes to this, that the ship is good, the pilote is
skilfull, and that the season is fit, circumstances only probable. After which he is bound to
go and suffer himself to be removed by apparances, alwaies provided they have no
express contrariety in them. He has a body, he has a soul, his senses urge him
forward, his mind moveth him. Although he find not this proper and singular marke of
judging in himself, and that he perceive he should not engage his consent seeing some
falsehood may be like unto this truth: he ceaseth not to conduct the offices of his life
fully and commodiously. How many arts are there which professe to consist more in
conjecture than in the science; that distinguish not betweene truth and falsehood, but only
follow seeming? There is both true and false (say they), and there are means in us to
seek it out, but not to stay it when we touch it. It is better for us to suffer the order of the
world to manage us without further inquisition. A mind warranted from prejudice has a
marvellous preferment to tranquillity. Men that sensure and controule their judges do
never duly submit unto them. How much more docile and tractable are simple and
uncurious mindes found both towards the laws of religion and Politike decrees, than
these over-vigilant and nice wits, teachers of divine and humane causes? There is nothing
in mans invention wherein is so much likelyhood, possibilities and profit. This
representeth man bare and naked, acknowledging his natural weaknesse, apt to receive
from above some strange power, disfurnished of all humane knowledge, and so much the
more fitte to harbour divine understanding, disannulling his judgement, that so he may
give more place unto faith. Neither misbeleeving nor establishing any doctrine or opinion
repugnant unto common laws and observances, humble, obedient, disciplinable and
studious; a sworne enemy to Heresie, and by consequence exempting himself from all
vain and irreligious opinions, invented and brought up by false Sects. It is a white sheet
prepared to take from the finger of God what form so ever it shall please him to imprint
therein. The more we addresse and commit ourselves to God, and reject ourselves, the
better it is for us. Accept (says Ecclesiastes) in good part things both in show and taste, as
from day to day they are presented unto you, the rest is beyond your knowledge. Dominus
novit cogitationes hominum, quoniam vanæ sunt: (Psal. xciii. 11.) ’The Lord knowes the
thoughts of men, that they are vayne.’ See how of three general Sects of Philosophie, two
make express profession of doubt and ignorance and in the third, which is the
Dogmatists, it is easy to be discerned that the greatest number have taken the face of
assurance; only because they could set a better countenance on the matter. They have not

so much gone about to establish any certainty in us, as to show how far they had waded
in seeking out the truth. Quam docti fingunt magis quam norunt: ’Which the learned do
rather conceit than know.’
Timæus, being to instruct Socrates of what he knowes of the Gods, of the world, and of
men, purposeth to speak of it as one man to another; and that it sufficeth, if his reasons
be as probable as another mans. For exact reasons are neither in his hands, nor in any
mortal man; which one of his Sectaries has thus imitated: Vt potero, explicabo: nec
tamen, ut Pythius Apollo, certa ut sint et fixa quæ dixero; sed ut homunculus, probabilia
conjectura sequens: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. i.) ’As I can, I will explaine them; yet not as Apollo
giving oracles, that all should be certain and set down, that I say but as a meane man
who followes likelihood by his conjecture.’ And that upon the discourse of the contempt of
death; a natural and popular discourse. Elsewhere he has translated it, upon Platoes very
words: Si forte, de Deorum natura ortuque mundi disserentes, minus id quod habemus in
animo consequimur, haud erit mirum. Æquum est enim meminisse, et me, qui disseram,
hominem esse, et vos qui judicetis: ut, si probabilia dicentur, nihil ultra requiratis (Cic.
Univers.) ’It will be no marvell if arguing of the nature of Gods and originall of the world,
we scarcely reach to that which in our mind we comprehend; for it is meet we remember
that both I am a man who am to argue, and you who are to judge, so as you seek no
further, if I speak but things likely.’ Aristotle ordinarily hoardeth us up a number of other
opinions and other beleefes, that so he may compare his unto it, and make us see how
far he has gone further, and how near he comes unto true-likelyhood. For truth is not
judged by authorities nor by others testimony. And therefore did Epicurus religiously
avoyd to aleadge any in his compositions. He is the Prince of Dogmatists, and yet we
learne of him that, to know much breedes an occasion to doubt more. He is often seen
seriously to shelter himself under so inextricable obscurities that his meaning cannot be
perceived. In effect, it is a Pyrrhonisme under a resolving form. Listen to Ciceroes
protestation, who does declare us others fantasies by his own. Qui requirunt, quid de
quaque re ipsi sentiamus; curiosius id faciunt, quam necesse est. Hæc in Philosophia ratio
contra omnia disserendi, nullamque rem aperte judicandi, profecta a Socrate, repetita ab
Arcesila, confirmata a Carneade, usque ad nostram viget ætatem. Hi sumus, qui omnibus
veris falsa quædam adiuncta esse di camus, tanta similitudine, ut in iis nulla insit certe
judicandi et assentiendi nota: (Cic. Nat. Deo. i.) ’They that would know what we conceit of
everything, use more curiosity than needs. This course in Philosophy to dispute against all
things, to judge eexpressly of nothing, derived from Socrates, renewed by Arcesilas,
confirmed by Carneades, is in force till our time: we are those that aver some falsehood
entermixt with every truth, and that with such likenesses as there is no set note in those
things for any a ssuredly to give judgement or assent.’ Why has not Aristotle alone, but
the greatest number of Philosophers, affected difficulty, unless it be to make the vanity
of the subject to prevaile, and to ammuse the curiosity of our mind, seeking to feed it by
gnawing so raw and bare a bone? Clytomachus affirmed that he could never understand by
the writings of Carneades, what opinion he was of. Why has Epicurus interdicted facility
unto his Sectaries? And why has Heraclitus been surnamed οχοτεινος ’a darke
mysty clowded fellow’? Difficulty is a coine that wise men make use of, as juglers do

with pass and repasse, because they will not display the vanity of their art, and wherewith
humane foolishnesse is easily apaid.
Clarus ob obscuram linguam, magis inter inanes,
Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur amantgue.
Inversis quæ sub verbi; latitantia cernunt. -- Lucr. i. 656.
For his darke speech much prais’d, but of the unwise;
For fooles do all still more admire and prize
That under words turn’d topsie-turvie lies.
Cicero reproveth some of his friends because they were wont to bestow more time about
astrology, law, logike, and geometry, than such arts could deserve; and diverted them
from the devoirs of their life, more profitable and more honest. The Cyrenaike
philosophers equally contemned natural philosophy and logicke. Zeno in the beginning of
his bookes of the Commonwealth declared all the liberall sciences to be unprofitable.
Chrysippussaid, that which Plato and Aristotle had written of logike, they had written the
same in jest and for exercise sake, and could not believe that ever they spake in good
earnest of so vain and idle a subject. Plutarke says the same of the metaphysikes:
Epicurus would have said it of rhetorike, of grammar, of poesie, of the mathematikes, and
(except natural philosophy of all other sciences: and Socrates of all, but of the art of civill
manners and life. Whatsoever he was demanded of any man, he would ever first enquire
of him to give an accompt of his life, both present and past, which he would seriously
examine and judge of; deeming all other apprentiships as subsequents and of
supererogation in regard of that. Parum mihi placeant ex literæ quæ ad virtutem
doctoribus nihil profuerunt: ’That learning pleaseth me but a little, which nothing
profiteth the teachers of it unto virtue.’ Most of the arts have thus been contemned by
knowledge itself, for they thought it not amisse to exercise their mindes in matters
wherein was no profitable solidity. As for the rest, some have judged Plato a dogmatist,
others a doubter; some a dogmatist in one thing, and some a doubter in another. Socrates,
the fore-man of his Dialogues does ever aske and propose his disputation; yet never
concluding, nor ever satisfying, and says he has no other science but that of opposing.
Their author, Homer, has equally grounded the foundations of all sects of philosophy,
thereby to show how indifferent he was which way he went. Some say that of Plato arose
ten diverse sects. And as I think, never was instruction wavering and nothing avouching
if his be not. Socrates was wont to say that when midwives begin once to put in practice
the trade to make other women bring forth children, themselves become barren. That be,
by the title of wise, which the gods had conferred upon him, had also in his man-like and
mentall love shaken off the faculty of begetting: Being well pleased to afford all helpe and
favor to such as were engenderers; to open their nature, to suple their passages, to ease the
issue of their child-bearing, to judge thereof, to baptise the same, to foster it, to strengthen
it, to swathe it, and to circumcise it, exercising and handling his instrument at the perill
and fortune of others. So is it with most authors of this third kind, as the ancients have

well noted by the writings of Anaxagoras, Democritus, Parmenides, Xenophanes, and
others. They have a manner of writing doubtfull both in substance and intent, rather
enquiring than instructing: albeit here and there they enterlace their stile with dogmaticall
cadences. And is not that as well seen in Seneca and in Plutarke? How much do they
speak sometimes of one face and sometimes of another, for such as looke near unto it?
Those who reconcile lawyers, ought first to have reconciled them every one unto himself.
Plato has (in my seeming) loved this manner of philosophying dialogue wise in good
earnest, that thereby he might more decently place in sundry mouthes the diversity and
variation of his own conceits. Diversly to treat of matters is as good and better as to treat
them conformably; that is to say, more copiously and more profitably. Let us take
example by ourselves. Definite sentences make the last period of dogmaticall and
resolving speech; yet see we that those which our Parliaments present unto our people as
the most exemplare and fittest to nourish in them the reverence they owe unto this
dignitie, especially by reason of the sufficiencie of those persons which exercise the same,
taking their glory, not by the conclusion, which to them is dayly, and is common to al
judges as much as the debating of diverse and agitations of contrary reasonings of law
causes will admit. And the largest scope for reprehensions of some Philosophers against
others, draweth contradictions and diversities with it, wherein every one of them findeth
himself so entangled, either by intent to show the wavering of mans mind above all
matters, or ignorantly forced by the volubilitie and incomprehensiblenesse of all matters:
What meaneth this burden? In a slippery and gliding place let us suspend our beliefe. For
as Euripides says,
Les oeuvres de Dieu en diverses
Facons, nous donnent des traverses.
Gods workes do travers our imaginations,
And crosse our workers in diverse different fashions.
Like unto that which Empedocles was wont often to scatter amongst his bookes, as
moved by a divine fury and forced by truth. No, no, we feel nothing, we see nothing; all
things are hid from us; there is not one that we may establish, how and what it is. But
returning to this holy word, Cogitationes mortalium timidæ, et incertæ ad inventiones
nostræ, et providentiæ (Wisd. c. ix. 14.) ’The thoughts of mortal men are feareful, our
devices and foresights are uncertaine.’ It must not be thought strange if men disparing of
the goale have yet taken pleasure in the chase of it; studie being in itself a pleasing
occupation, indeed so pleasing that amid sensualities the Stoics forbid also that which
comes from the exercise of the mind, and require a bridle to it, and find intemperance in
over much knowledge. Democritus having at his table eaten some figges that tasted of
hony, began presently in his mind to seek out whence this unusuall sweetness in them
might proceed; and to be resolved, rose from the board, to view the place where those
figges had been gathered. His maide servant noting this alteration in her master,
smilingly said unto him, that he should no more busie himself about it; the reason was,

she had laide them in a vessell where hony had been; whereat he seemed to be wroth in
that she had deprived him of the occasion of his intended search, and robbed his
curiosity of matter to work upon. ’Away,’ quoth he unto her, ’you hast much offended
me; yet will I not omit to find out the cause, as if it were naturally so.’ Who perhaps
would not have missed to find some likely or true reason for a false and supposed effect.
This story of a famous and great Philosopher does evidently represent unto us this
studious passion, which so does ammuse us in pursuit of things, of whose obtaining we
despaire. Plutarke reporteth a like example of one who would not be resolved of what he
doubted, because he would not lose the pleasure he had in seeking it: As another, that
would not have his Physitian remove the thirst he felt in his ague, because he would not
lose the pleasure he took in quenching the same with drinking. Satius est supervacua
discere, quam nihil: (Sen. Epist. 89. f.) ’It is better to learne more than we need than
nothing at all.’ Even as in all feeding, pleasure is alwayes alone and single and all we take
that is pleasant is not ever nourishing and wholesome: So likewise, what our mind
draws from learning leaveth not to be voluptuous, although it neither nourish nor be
wholesome. Note what their saying is: ’The consideration of nature is a food proper for
our mindes, it raiseth and puffeth us up, it makes us by the comparison, of heavenly and
high things to disdaine base an d low matters. The search of hidden and great causes is
very pleasant, indeed unto him that attaines nought but the reverence and fear to judge of
them.’ These are the very words of their profession. The vain image of this crazed
curiosity is more manifestly seen in this other example, which they for honor-sake have
so often in their mouths. Eudoxus wished, and praid to the Gods, that he might once view
the Sunne near at hand, to comprehend his form, his greatness and his beautie: on
condition he might immediately be burnt and consumed by it. Thus with the price of his
own life would he attaine a Science, whereof both use and possession shall therewith be
taken from him; and for so sudden and fleeting knowledge lose and forgoe all the
knowledges he either now has, or ever hereafter may have. I can not easily be persuaded
that Epicurus, Plato, or Pythagoras have sold us their atomes, their ideas and their
numbers for ready payment. They were over wise to establish their articles of faith upon
things so uncertaine and disputable. But in this obscuritie and ignorance of the world, each
of these notable men has endeavoured to bring some kind of show or image of light; and
have busied their mindes about inventions that might at least have a pleasing and wilie
apparance, provided (notwithstanding it were false) it might be maintained against
contrary oppositions: Vnicuiquæ ista pro ingenio finguntur, non ex Scientiæ vi: ’These
things are conceited by every man as his wit serves, not as his knowledge stretches and
reaches.’ An ancient Phylosopher being blamed for professing that Philosophie, whereof
in his judgement he made no esteeme; answered, that that was true Philosophizing. They
have gone about to consider all, to balance all, and have found that it was an occupation
fitting the natural curiosity which is in us. Some things they have written for the behoofe
of common societie, as their religions: And for this consideration was it reasonable that
they would not throughly unfold common opinions, that so they might not breed trouble in
the obedience of laws and customs of their countries. Plato treateth this mysterie in a
very manifest kind of sport. For, where he writeth according to himself, he prescribeth

nothing for certaintie: When he institutes a Law giver, he borroweth a very swaying and
avouching kind of stile: Wherein he boldly entermingleth his most fantastic opinions;
as profitable to persuade the common sort, as ridiculous to persuade himself: Knowing
how apt we are to receive all impressions, and chiefly the most wicked and enormous.
And therefore is he very careful in his laws that nothing be sung in public but Poesies
the fabulous fictions of which tend to some profitable end: being so apt to imprint all
manner of illusion in man’s mind, that it is injustice not to feed them rather with
commodious lies, than with lies either unprofitable or damageable. He flatly says in his
Common-wealth that for the benefit of men, it is often necessarie to deceive them. It is
easy to distinguish how some Sects have rather followed truth, and some profit; by which
the latter have gained credit. It is the misery of our condition that often what offers itself
unto our imagination for the likelyst, presents not itself unto it for the most beneficiall
unto our life. The boldest sects, both Epicurean, Pirrhonian and new Academike, when
they have cast their accompt are compelled to stoop to the civill law. There are other
subjects which they have tossed, some on the left and some on the right hand, each one
labouring and striving to give it some semblance, were it right or wrong: For, having
found nothing so secret, whereof they have not attempted to speak, they are many times
forced to forge diverse feeble and foolish  conjectures : Not that themselves took them for a
ground-work, not to establish a truth, but for an exercise of their studie. Non tam id
sensisse, quod dicerent, quam exercere ingenia materiæ difficultate videntur voluisse.
’They seem not so much to have thought as they said, as rather willing to exercise their
wits in the difficulty of the matter.’ And if it were not so taken, how should we cloke so
great an inconstancie, varietie and vanity of opinions, which we see to have been
produced by these excellent and admirable spirits? As for example, What greater vanity
can there be than to go about by our proportions and conjectures to guess at God? And
to governe both him and the world according to our capacitie and laws? And to use this
small scantlin of sufficiencie, which he has pleased to impart unto our natural condition,
at the cost and charges or divinitie? And because we cannot extend our sight so far as
his glorious throne, to have removed him down to our corruption and miseries? Of all
humane and ancient opinions concerning religion, I think that to have had more
likelyhood and excuse, which knowledged and confessed God to be an incomprehensible
power, chief beginning and preserver of all things; all goodness, all perfection; accepting
in good part the honor and reverence which mortal men did yield him, under what
usage, name and manner soever it was.
Jupiter omnipotens rerum, regumque, Deumque,
Progenitor, genitrixque.
Almightie love is parent said to be
Of things, of Kings, of Gods, both he and she.
This zeale has universally been regarded of heaven with a gentle and gracious eye.
All policies have reaped some fruit by their devotion; Men and impious actions have

every where had correspondent events. Heathen histories acknowledge dignitie, order,
justice, prodigies, and oracles, employed for their benefit and instruction in their fabulous
religion: God of his mercy daining, perhaps, to foster by his temporal blessings the
budding and tender beginnings of such brute knowledge as natural reason gave them of
him athwart the false images of their deluding dreames: Not only false but impious and
injurious are those which man has forged and devised by his own invention. And of all
religions Saint Paul found in credit at Athens, that which they had consecrated onto a
certain hidden and unknown divinitie seemed to be most excusable. Pythagoras
shadowed the truth some what nearer, judgeing that the knowledge of this first cause and
Ens entium must be undefined, without any prescription or declaration. That it was
nothing else but the extreme indevour of our imagination toward perfection, every one
amplifying the idea thereof according to his capacitie. But if Numa undertook to
conforme the devotion of his people to this project, to join the same to a religion meerely
mental without any prefixt object or materiall mixture, he undertook a matter to no use.
Mans mind could never be maintained if it were still floting up and down in this infinite
deepe of shapeles conceits. They must be framed onto her to some image according to her
model. The majesty of God has in some sort suffered itself to be circumscribed to
corporall limits: His supernaturall and celestiall Sacraments bear signes of our
terrestriall condition. His adoration is exprest by offices and sensible words; for it is man
that beleeveth and praieth. I omit other arguments that are employed about this subject.
But I could hardly be made believe that the sight of our Crucifixes and pictures of that
pittiful torment, that the ornaments and ceremonious motions in our Churches, that the
voyces accomodated and suted to our thoughts-devotions, and this stirring of our senses,
does not greatly inflame the peoples soules with a religious passion of wonderous
beneficiall good. Of those to which they have given bodies, as necessity required amid
this general blindnesse, as for me; I should rather have taken part with those who
worshipped the Sunne.
-----la lumiere comnune,
L’ail du monde; et si Dieu au chef porte des yeux,
Les rayons du Soleil sont ses yeux radieux
Qui donnent vie a tous, nous maintiennent et gardent,
Et les faicts des humains en ce monde regardent:
Ce beau, ce grand Soleil, qui nous fait les saysons,
Selon qu’il entre ou sort de ses douze maysons:
Qui remplit l’univers de ses vertus cognues,
Qui d’un traict de ses yeux nous dissipe les nues:
L’espirit, l’ame du monde, ardent et flamboyant,
En la course d’un iour tout le Ciel tournoyant,
Plein d’immense grandeur, rond, vagabond et ferme:
Lequel tient dessoubs luy tout le monde pour terme,
En repos sans repos, oysif, et sans seiour,
Fils aisne de Nature, et le Pere du iour.

The common light,
The worlds eye: and if God bear eyes in his cheefe head,
His most resplendent eyes the Sunne-beames may be said,
Which unto all give life, which us maintaine and guard,
And in this world of men, the workes of men regard:
This great, this beauteous Sunne, which us our seasons makes,
As in twelve houses ee ingresse or egresse takes;
Who with his Vertues known, does fill this universe,
With one cast of his eyes does us all clowds disperse:
The spirit, and the soul of this world, flaming, burning,
Round about heav’n in course of one dayes journey turning.
Of endlesse greatness full, round, moveable and fast:
Who all the world for bounds beneath himself has pla’st:
In rest, without rest, and still more stayed, without stay,
Of Nature the eldest Childe, and Father of the day.
Forasmuch as besides this greatness and matchlesse beautie of his, it is the only
glorious piece of this vaste worlds frame, which we perceive to be furthest from us: And
by that meane so little known as they are pardonable, they entered into admiration and
reverence of it. Thales, who was the first to enquire and find out this matter, esteemed
God to be a spirit who made all things of water. Anaximander thought the Gods did dy,
and were new borne at diverse seasons, and that the worlds were infinite in number.
Anaximenes deemed the air to be a God, which was created immense and always
moving. Anaxagoras was the first that held the description and manner of all things to be
directed by the power and reason of a spirit infinite. Alcmæon has ascribed divinity unto
the Sunne, unto the Moone, unto Stars, and unto the Soule. Pythagoras has made God a
spirit dispersed through the Nature of all things, whence our soules are derived.
Parmenides, a circle circumpassing the heavens, and by the heat of light maintaining the
world. Empedocles said the four Natures, whereof all things are made, to be Gods.
Protagoras, that he had nothing to say whether they were or were not, or what they were.
Democritus would sometimes say that the images and their circuitions were Gods, and
othertimes this Nature, which disperseth these images, and then our knowledge and
intelligence. Plato scattereth his beliefe after diverse semblances. In his Timæus he says
that the worlds father could not be named. In his Lawes that his being must not be
enquired after. And elsewhere in the said bookes he maketh the world, the heaven, the
starres, the earth, and our soules, to be Gods; and besides, admitteth those that by ancient
institutions have been received in every commonwealth. Xenophon reporteth a like
difference of Socrates his discipline. Sometimes that Gods form ought not to be inquired
after; then he makes him infer that the Sunne is a God, and the Soule a God; othertimes
that there is but one, and then more. Speusippus, Nephew unto Plato, makes God to be a
certain power, governing all things, and having a soul. Aristotle says sometimes that it
is the spirit, and sometimes the world; othertimes he appoynteth another ruler over this

world, and sometimes he makes God to be the heat of heaven. Xenocrates makes eight;
five named amongst the planets, the sixth composed of all the fixed starres, as of his own
members; the seaventh and eighth the Sunne and the Moone. Heraclides Ponticus does but
roame among his opinions, and in fine depriveth God of sense, and maks him remove and
transchange himself from one form to another; and then says that is both heaven and
earth. Theophrastus in all his fantasies wandereth still in like irresolutions, attributing the
worlds superintendency now to the intelligence, now to the heaven, and now to the starres.
Strabo, that it is Nature having power to engender, to augment and to diminish, without
form or sense. Zeno, the natural Law, commanding the good and prohibiting the evil;
which Lawe is a breathing creature, and removeth the accustomed Gods, Jupiter, Iuno, and
Vesta. Diogenes Apolloniates, that it is Age. Xenophanes makes God round, seeing,
hearing not breathing, and having nothing common with humane Nature. Aristo deemeth
the form of God to be incomprehensible, and depriveth him of senses, and wotteth not
certainely whether he be a breathing soul or something else. Cleanthes, sometimes
reason, othertimes the World; now the soul of Nature, and other-while the supreme heat,
enfoulding and containing all. Perseus, Zenoes disciple, has been of opinion that they
were surnamed Gods who had brought some notable good or benefit unto humane life, or
had invented profitable things. Chrysippus made a confused huddle of all the foresaid
sentences, and amongst a thousand formes of the Gods which he faineth, he also
accompteth those men that are immortalized. Diagoras and Theodorus flatly denied that
there were anie Gods: Epicurus makes the Gods bright-shining, transparent, and perflable,
placed as it were betweene two Forts, betweene two Worlds, safely sheltered from all
blowes, invested with a humane shape, and with our members, which unto them are of no
use.
Ego Deum genus esse semper duxi, et dicam cælitum,
Sed eos non curare opinor, quid agat humanum genus. -- ENN. in CIC. De
Div. ii.
I still thought and wil say, of Gods there is a kind;
But what Our mankinde does, I think they nothing mind.
Trust to your Philosophie, boast to have hit the naile on the head; or to have found out
the beane of this cake, to see this coile and hurly-burly of so many Philosophical wits. The
trouble or confusion of worldly shapes and formes has gotten this of me, that customs
and conceipts differing from mine do not so much dislike me as instruct me; and at what
time I conferre or compare them together, they do not so much puffe me up with pride as
humble me with lowlinesse. And each other choyce, except that which commeth from the
express hand of God, seems to me a choyce of small prerogative or consequence. The
worlds policies are no less contrary one to another in this subject than the schooles
whereby we may learne that Fortune herself is no more diverse, changing, and variable,
than our reason, nor more blinde and inconsiderat. Things most unknown are fittest to be
deified. Wherefore to make Gods of ourselves (as antiquitie has done), it exceeds the

extreme weaknesse of discourse. I would rather have followed those that worshipped the
Serpent, the Dogge, and the Ox, forasmuch as their Nature and being is least known to
us, and we may more lawfully imagine what we list of those beasts, and ascribe
extraordinarie faculties unto them. But to have made Gods of our conditions, whose
imperfections we should know, and to have attributed desire, choler, revenge, marriages,
generation, alliances, love, and jealousie, our limbs and our bones, our infirmities, our
pleasures, our deaths, and our sepulchres unto them has of necessity proceeded from a
meere and egregious sottishness or drunkennesse of mans wit.
Quæ procul usque adeo divino ab numine distant.
Inque Deum numero quæ sint indigna videri. -- LUCR. v. 123.
Which from Divinity so distant are,
To stand in ranks of Gods unworthy far.
Formæ, ætates, vestitus ornatus noti sunt: genera, conjugia, cognationes, omniaque
traducta ad similitudinem imbecillitatis humanæ: nam et perturbatis animis inducuntur;
accipimus enim Deorum cupiditates ægritudines, iracundias: ’Their shapes, their ages,
their aparrell, their furnitures are knowen; their kindes, their marriages, their kindred,
and all translated to the likenesse of man’s weaknesse: For they are also brought in with
mindes much troubled; for we read of the lustfulnesse, the grievings, the angrinesse of the
Gods.’ As to have ascribed Divinity, not only unto faith, virtue, honor, concord, liberty,
victory and piety; but also unto voluptuousness, fraud, death, envy, age and misery; indeed
unto fear, unto ague, and unto evil fortune, and such other industries and wrongs to our
fraile and transitory life:
Quid juvat hoc, templis nostros inducere mores?
O curvæ in terris animæ et cælestium inanes! -- PERS. Sat. ii. 62, 61.
What boots it, into Temples to bring manners of our kindes?
O crooked soules on earth, and void of heavenly mindes.
The Egyptians, with an impudent wisdom forbad, upon a of hanging, that no man
should dare to say that Serapis and Isis, their Gods, had whilome been but men, when all
knew they had been so. And their images or pictures drawne with a finger acrosse their
mouth imported (as Varro says) this misterious rule unto their priests, to conceal their
mortal off-spring, which by necessary reason disannuled all their veneration. Since man
desired so much to equall himself to God, it had been better for him (says Cicero) to
draw those divine conditions unto himself, and bring them down to earth, than to send
his corruption and place his misery above in heaven; but to take him aright, he has diverse
ways, and with like vanity of opinion, does both the one and other. When Philosophers
blazon and display the Hierarchy of their gods, and to the utmost of their skill endeavor to

distinguish their aliances, their charges, and their powers; I cannot believe they speak in
good earnest. When Plato decyphreth unto us the orchard of Pluto, and the commodities
or corporall paines which even after the ruine and consumption of our body waite for us,
and applyeth them to the apprehension or feeling we have in this life;
Secreti celant colles, et myrtea circum
Sylva tegit, curæ non ipsa in morte relinquunt; -- Virg. Æn. vi. 443.
Them paths aside conceal, a mirtle grove
Shades them round; cares in death do not remove;
when Mahomet promiseth unto his followers a paradise all tapestried, adorned with gold
and precious stones, peopled with exceeding beauteous damsels, stored with wines and
singular cates: I well perceive they are but scoffers which sute and apply themselves unto
our foolishness, thereby to enhonny and allure us to these opinions and hopes fitting our
mortal appetite. Even so are some of our men falne into like errours by promising unto
themselves after their resurrection a terrestriall and temporal life accompanied with all
sorts of pleasures and worldly commodities. Shall we think that Plato, who had so
heavenly conceptions and was so well acquainted with Divinity as of most he purchased
the surname of Divine, was ever of opinion that man (this seely and wretched creature
man) had any one thing in him which might in any sort he applied and suted to this
incomprehensible and unspeakable power? or ever imagined that our languishing hold-
fasts were capable, or the virtue of our understanding of force, to participate or be
partakers either of the blessednesse or eternal punishment? He ought in the behalfe of
humane reasoned he answered: If the pleasures you promisest us in the other life are such
as I have felt here below, they have nothing in them common with infinity. if all my five
natural senses were even surcharged with joy and gladnesse, and my soul possessed with
all the contents and delights it could possibly desire or hope for (and we know what it
either can wish or hope for) yet were it nothing. If there be any thing that is mine, then is
there nothing that is Divine; if it be nothing else but what may appertaine unto this our
present condition, it may n ot be accounted of. All mortal mens contentment is mortal.
The acknowledging of our parents, of our children and of our friends, if it cannot touch,
move or tickle us in the other world, if we still take hold of such a pleasure, we continue
in terrestrial and transitorie commodities. We can not worthily conceive of these high,
mysterious, and divine promises, if we can but in any sort conceive them, and so imagine
them aright; they must be thought to be immaginable, unspeakeable and
incomprehensible, and absolutely and perfectly other than those of our miserable
experience. ’No eye can behold (says Saint Paul) the hap that God prepareth for his elect,
nor can it possibly enter the heart of man. (1 Cor. ii. 9.) And if to make us capable of it
(as you saist, Plato, by your purifications), our being is reformed and essence changed, it
must be by so extreme and universall a change that, according to philosophicall doctrine,
we shall be no more ourselves:

Hector erat tunc cum belle certabat , at ille
Tractus ab Æmonio non erat Hector equo. -- Ovid. Trist. iii. El. xi. 27.
Hector he was, when he in fight us’d force;
Hector he was not, drawne by th’enemies horse,
it shall be some other thing that shall receive these recompences.
-----quod mutatur, dissolvitur; interit ergo:
Trajiciuntur enim partes atque ordine migrant. -- Lucr. iii. 781.
What is chang’d is dissolved, therefore dies:
Translated parts in order fall and rise.
For in the Metempsychosis or transmigration of soules of Pythagoras, and the change of
habitation which he imagined the soules to make, shall we think that the lion in whom
abideth the soul of Cæsar, does wed the passions which concerned Cæsar, or that it is
he? And if it were he, those had some reason who, debating this opinion against Plato,
object that the son might one day be found committing with his mother under the
shape of a Mules body, and such like absurdities. And shall we imagine that in the
transmigrations which are made from the bodies of some creatures into others of the same
kind, the new succeeding ones are not other than their predecessors were? Of a Phenixes
cinders, first (as they say) is engendred a worme and then another Phenix: who can
imagine that this second Phenix be no other and different from the first? Our Silk-wormes
are seen to dye and then to wither drie, and of that body breedeth a Butter-flie, and of
that a worme, were it not ridiculous to think the same to be the first Silkeworm? what
has once lost its being is no more.
Nec si materiam nostram collegerit ætas
Post obitum, rursumque redegerit, ut sita nunc est,
Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitæ,
Pertineat quidquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum,
Interrupta semel cum sit repetentia nostra. -- Ibid. 890.
If time sho uld recollect, when life is past,
Our stuffe, and it replace, as now ’tis plac’t,
And light of life were granted us again,
Yet nothing would that deed to us pertaine,
When interrupted were our turn again.
And Plato, when in another place you saist that it shall be the spirituall part of man that
shall enjoy the recompences of the other life, you tellest of things of as small likely-hood.

Scilicet avulsus radicibus ut nequit ullam
Dispicere ipse oculus rem, seorsum corpore toto. -- Ibid. 580.
Ev’n as no eye, by the root’s pull’d out, can see
Ought in whole body severall to be.
For by this reckoning it shall no longer be man, nor consequently us, to whom this
enjoyment shall appertaine; for we are built of two principal essential parts, the
separation of which is the death and consummation of our being.
Inter enim jecta est vitai pausa vageque
Deerrarunt passim motus ab sensibus omnes. -- Ibid. 903.
A pause of life is interpos’d; from sense
All motions straied are, far wandring thence.
We do not say that man suffereth when the wormes gnaw his body and limbs whereby he
lived, and that the earth consumeth them:
Et nihil hoc ad nos, qui coitu conjugioque
Corporis atque animæ consistimus uniter apti. -- -- Ibid. 888.
This nought concerns us, who consist of union
Of mind and body joyn’d in meet communion.
Moreover, upon what ground of their justice can the Gods reward man and be thankfull
unto him after his death, for his good and vertuous actions, since themselves addressed
and bred them in him? And why are they offended and revenge his vicious deeds,
when themselves have created him with so defective a condition, and that but with one
twinkling of their will they may hinder him from sinning? Might not Epicurus with some
show of humane reason object that unto Plato, if he did not often shrowd himself under
this sentence, that it is impossible by mortal nature to establish any certainty of the
immortall? Shee is ever straying but especially when she meddles with divine matters.
Who feeles it more evidently than we? For, although we have ascribed unto her assured
and infallible Principles, albeit we enlighten her steps with the holy lampe of that truth
which God has been pleased to impart unto us, we notwithstanding see daily, how little
soever she stray from the ordinary path that she start or stragle out of the way traced and
measured out by the Church, how soone she loses, entangleth and confoundeth herself;
turning, tossing and floating up and down in this vast, troublesome and tempestuous sea
of mans opinions without restraint or scope. So soone as she loses this high and common
way, she divideth and scattereth herself a thousand diverse ways. Man can be no other

than he is, nor imagine but according to his capacity. It is greater presumption (says
Plutarch in them that are but men, to attempt to reason and discourse of Gods and of demi-
Gods, than in a man meerly ignorant of music to judge of those that sing; or for a man
that was never in wars to dispute of, Armes and war, presuming by some light
conjecture to comprehend the effects of an art altogether beyond his skill. As I think,
Antiquity imagined it did something for divine Majesty when she compared the same
unto man, attiring her with his faculties, and enriching her with his strange humors and
most shamefull necessities: offering her some of our cates to feed upon, and some of our
dances, mummeries, and enterludes to make her merry, with our clothes to apparrell her,
and our houses to lodge her, cherishing her with the sweet odors of incense, and sounds of
music, adorning her with garlands and flowers, and to draw her to our vicious passion, t
o flatter her justice with an inhuman revenge, gladding her with the ruine and dissipation
of things created and preserved by her. As Tiberius Sempronius, who for a sacrifice to
Vulcan caused the rich spoiles and arms which he had gotten of his enemies in Sardinia
to be burned: And Paulus Emilius, those he had obtained in Macedonia, to Mars and
Minerva. And Alexander, coming to the Ocean of India, cast in favor of Thetis many
great rich vessels of gold into the Sea, replenishing, moreover, her Altars with a butcherly
slaughter, not only of innocent beasts, but of men, as diverse Nations, and amongst the
rest, ours were wont to do. And I think none has been exempted from shewing the like
Essayes.
-----Sul mone creatos
Quatuor hic juvenes, totidem, quos educat Usens,
Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet umbris. -- Virg. Æn. x. 517.
Foure young-men borne of Sulmo, and foure more
Whom Usens bred, he living over-bore,
Whom he to his dead friend
A sacrifice might send.
The Getes deem themselves immortall, and their death but the beginning of a journey
to their God Zamolxis. From five to five years they dispatch some one among themselves
toward him, to require of him necessarie things. This deputy of theirs is chosen by lots;
and the manner to dispatch him, after they have by word of mouth instructed him of his
charge, is that amongst those which assist his election, three hold so many javelins
upright, upon which the others, by meere strength of arms, throw him; if he chance to
sticke upon them in any mortal place, and that he dye suddenly, it is to them an assured
argument of divine favor; but if he escape, they deem him a wicked and execrable man,
and then chuse another. Amestris, mother unto Xerxes, being become aged, caused at one
time fourteen young striplings of the noblest houses of Persia (following the religion of
her countrie) to be buried all alive, thereby to gratifie some God of under earth. Even at
this day the Idols of Temixitan are cemented with the blood of young children, and love no
sacrifice but of such infant and pure soules: Oh justice, greedy of the blood of innocencie.

Tantum religio portuit suadere malorum. -- Lucr. i. 102.
Religion so much mischeefe could
Perswade, where it much better should.
The Carthaginians were wont to sacrifice their own children unto Saturne, and who
had none was faine to buy some: and their fathers and mothers were enforced in their
proper persons, with cheerful and pleasant countenance to assist that office. It was a
strange conceit, with our own affliction to go about to please and appay divine
goodnesse: As the Lacedemonians, who flattered and wantonized their Diana by torturing
of young boys, whom often in favor of her they caused to be whipped to death. It was a
savage kind of humor to think to gratifie the Architect with the subversion of his
Architecture, and to cancel the punishment due unto the guiltie by punishing the guiltles,
and to imagine that poore Iphigenia, in the port of Aulis, should by her death and sacrifice
discharge and expiate towards God, the Greeks army of the offences which they had
committed.
Et casta inceste nubendi tempore in ipso
Hostia concideret mactatu mæsta parentis. -- Ibid. 99.
She, a chaste offring, griev’d incestuously
By fathers stroke, when she should wed, to dye.
And those two noble and generous soules of the Decii, father and son, to reconcile
and appease the favor of the Gods towards the Romanes affairs, should headlong cast
their bodies athwart the thickest throng of their enemies. Quæ fuit tanta Deorum iniquitas,
ut placari populo Romano non possint, nisi tales viri occidissent? ’What injustice of the
Gods was so great as they could not be appeased unless such men perished?’
Considering that it lies not in the offender to cause himself to be whipped, how and when
he list, but in the judge, who accompteth nothing a right punishment except the torture he
appointeth and cannot impute that unto punishment which is in the free choice of him that
suffereth. The divine vengeance presupposeth our full dissent, for his justice and our
pain. And ridiculous was that humor of Polycrates, the Tyrant of Samos, who, to
interrupt the course of his continuall happinesse, and to recompence it, cast the richest and
most precious jewell he had into the Sea, deeming that by this purposed mishap he should
satisfie the revolution and vicissitude of fortune; which, to deride his folly, caused, the
very same jewel, being found in a fishes belly, to return to his hands again. And to what
purpose are the manglings and dismembrings of the Corybantes, of the Mænades, and
now a dayes of the Mahumetans, who skar and gash their faces, their stomacke and their
limbes, to gratifie their prophet: seeing the offence consisteth in the will not in the breast,
nor eyes, nor in the genitories, health, shoulders, or throat? Tantus est perturbatæ mentis

et sedibus suis pulsæ furor, ut sic Dii placentur, quemadmodum ne homines quidem
sæviunt: (AUG. Civ. Dei. vi. c. 10.) ’So great is the fury of a troubled mind put from the
state it should be in, as the Gods must be so pacified, as even men would not be so
outrageous.’ This natural contexture does by her use not only respect us, but also the
service of God and other mens: it is injustice to make it miscarie at our pleasure, as under
what pretence soever it be to kill ourselves. It seems to be a great cowardise and
manifest treason to abuse the stupide and corrupt the servile functions of the body, to
spare the diligence unto the soul how to direct them according unto reason. Vbi iratos
Deos timent , qui sic propitios habere merentur. In regiæ libidinis voluptatem castrate
sunt quidam; sed nemo sibi, ne vir esset, jubente Domino manus intulit: (Ibid. e Senec.)
’Where are they afeard of Gods anger, who in such sort deserve to have his favor; some
have been guelded for Princes lustfull pleasure; but no man at the Lords command has
laid hands on himself to be less than a man.’ Thus did they replenish their religion and
stuffe it with diverse bad effects.
-----sæpius olim
Religio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta. -- Lucr. i. 82.
Religion has oft times in former times
Bred execrable facts, ungodly crimes,
Now can nothing of ours, in what manner soever, be either compared or referred unto
divine nature, that does not blemish and defile the same with as much imperfection. How
can this infinite beauty, power, and goodnes admit any correspondencie or similitude with
a thing so base and abject as we are, without extreme interest, and manifest derogation
from his divine greatness? Infirmum Dei fortius est hominibus; et stultum Dei sapientius
est hominibus: (1 Cor. i. 25.) ’The weaknesse of God is stronger than man; and the
foolishnesse of God is wiser than men.’ Stilpo the Philosopher being demanded whether
the Gods rejoice at our honors and sacrifices; you are indiscreet (said he), let us
withdraw ourselves apart if you speak of such matters. Notwithstanding we prescribe
him limits, we lay continuall siege unto his power by our reasons. (I call our dreames and
our vanities reason, with the dispensation of Philosophy, which says that both the foole
and the wicked do rave and dote by reason, but that it is a reason of severall and
particular form.) We will subject him to the vain and weake apparances of our
understanding: him who has made both us and our knowledge. Because nothing is made
of nothing: God was not able to frame the world without matter. What? has God
delivered into our hands the keyes, and the strongest wards of his infinit puissance? Hath
he obliged himself not to exceed the bounds of our knowledge? Suppose, oh man, that
herein you hast been able to marke some signes of his effects. Thinkest you he has
therein employed all he was able to do, and that he has placed all his formes and ideas in
this peece of work? Thou seest but the order and policy of this little cell wherein you are
placed. The question is, whether you seest it. His divinitie has an infinit jurisdiction far
beyond that. This peece is nothing in respect of the whole.

-----omnia cum cælo terraque marique,
Nil sunt ad summam summai totius omnem. -- Lucr. vi. 675.
All things that are, with heav’n, with sea, and land,
To the whole summe of the whole summe as nothing stand.
This law you aleagest is but a municipall law, and you knowest not what the universall
is: tie your self unto that whereto you are subject, but tie not him: he is neither your
companion, nor your brother, nor your fellow citizen, nor your copesmate. If lie in any sort
have communicated himself unto you, it is not to debase himself, or stoop to your
smalnesse, nor to give you the controulment of his power. Mans body cannot soare up
into the clouds, this is for you. The sunne uncessantly goeth his ordinary course the
bounds of the seas and of the earth cannot be confounded: the water is ever fleeting,
wavering, and without firmnesse: a wall without breach or flaw, impenetrable unto a solid
body: man cannot preserve his life amidst the flames, he cannot corporally be both in
heaven and on earth, and in a thousand places together and at once. It is for you that he
has made these rules: it is you they take hold of. He has testified unto Christians that
when ever it has pleased him he has out gone them all. And in truth, omnipotent as he is,
why should he have restrained his forces unto a limited measure? In favor of whom
should be have renounced his privilege? Thy reason has in no one other thing more likely-
hood and foundation, than in that which perswadeth you a plurality of words.
Terramque et solem, lunam, mare, cætera quæ sunt,
Non esse unica, sed numero magis innumerali. -- Ibid. ii. 1094.
The earth, the sunne, the moone, the sea and all
In number numberlesse, not one they call.
The famousest wits of former ages have beleeved it, indeed some of our modern, as
forced thereunto by the apparance of humane reason. For as much as whatsoever eye see
in this vast worlds frame, there is no one thing alone, single and one.
---- cum in summa res nulla sit una,
Unica quæ gignatur, et unica solaque crescat: - Ibid. 1086.
Whereas in general summe, nothing is one,
To be bred only one, grow only one.
And that all severall kindes are multiplied in some number: whereby it seems unlikely
that God has framed this peece of work alone without a fellow: and that the matter of this
form has wholy been spent in this only Individuum.

Quare etiam atqæ etiam tales fateare necesse est,
Esse alios alibi congressus matiriæ,
Qualis hic est avidi complexu quem tenet Æther. -- Ibid. 1073.
Wherefore you must confesse, again again,
Of matters such like meetings elsewhere raigne
As this, these skies in greedy gripe containe.
Namely, if it be a breathing creature, as its motions make it so likely, that Plato assureth
it, and diverse of ours either affirme it, or dare not impugne it; no more than this old
opinion, that the heaven, the starres, and other members of the world, are creatures
composed both of body and soul; mortal in respect of their composition, but immortall
by the Creators decree. Now if there be diverse worlds, as Democritus, Epicurus, and well
near all Philosophy has thought; what know we whether the principles and the rules of
this one concerns or touch likewise the others? Haply they have another semblance and
another policy. Epicurus imagineth them either like or unlike. We see an infinite
difference and varietie in this world only by the distance of places. There is neither corne
nor wine, no nor any of our beasts seen in that new corner of the world which our fathers
have lately discovered: all things differ from ours. And in the old time, marke but in how
many parts of the world they had never knowledge nor of Bacchus nor of Ceres. If any
credit may be given unto Plinie or to Herodotus, there is in some places a kind of men
that have very little or no resemblance at all with ours. And there be mungrell and
ambiguous shapes betweene a humane and brutish nature. Some countries there are where
men are borne headlesse, with eyes and mouths in their breasts; where all are
Hermaphrodites; where they creepe on all foure; where they have but one eye in their
forehead, and heads more like unto a dog than ours; where from the navill downewards
they are half fish and live in the water; where women are brought a bed at five years of
age, and live but eight; where their heads and the skin of their browes are so hard that no
yron can pierce them, but will rather turn edge; where men never have beards. Other
nations there are that never have use of fire; others whose sperme is of a blacke colour.
What shall we speak of them who natarally change themselves into woolves, into coults,
and then into men again? And if it be (as Plutark says) that in some part of the Indiæs
there are men without mouthes, and who live only by the smell of certain sweet odours;
how many of our descriptions be then false ? He is no more risible, nor perhaps capable
of reason and societie. The direction and cause of our inward frame should for the most
part be to no purpose. Moreover, how many things are there in our knowledge that
oppugne these goodly rules which we have allotted and prescribed unto Nature? And we
undertake to join God himself unto her. How many things do we name miraculous and
against Nature? Each man and every nation does it according to the measure of his
ignorance. How many hidden proprieties and quintessences do we daily discover? For us
to go according to Nature, is but to follow according to our understanding, as far as it can
follow, and as much as we can perceive in it. Whatsoever is beyond it, is monstrous and

disordered. By this accompt all shall then be monstrous, to the wisest and most sufficient;
for even to such humane reason has persuaded that she had neither ground nor footing,
no not so much as to warrant snow to be white: and Anaxagoras said it was blacke. W
hether there be anything or nothing; whether there be knowledge or ignorance, which
Metrodorus Chius denied that any man might say; or whether we live, as Euripides
seems to doubt and call in question; whether the life we live be a life or no, or whether
that which we call death be a life:
Τις δ οιδεν ει ζην τουθ’ ο κεκληται θανειν,
Το ζην οε θνηοκειν εοτι; -- Plat. Gorg. ex Eurip.
Who knowes if thus to live, be called death,
And if it be to dye, thus to draw breath;
And not without apparance. For why do we from that instant take a title of being,
which is but a twinkling in the infinit course of an eternall night, and so short an
interruption of our perpetuall and natural condition? Death possessing what ever is before
and behind this moment, and also a good part of this moment. Some others affirme there
is no motion, and that nothing stirreth; namely, those which follow Melissus. For if there
be but one, neither can this sphericall motion serve him, nor the moving from one place to
another, as Plato proveth, that there is neither generation nor corruption in nature.
Protagoras says there is nothing in nature but doubt: that a man may equally dispute of
all things: and of that also, whether all things may equally be disputed of: Nausiphanes
said, that of things which seem to be, no one thing is nno more than it is not. That
nothing is certain but uncertainty. Parmenides, that of that which seems there is no one
thing in general. That there is but one Zeno, that one self same is not: and that there is
nothing. If one were, he should either be in another, or in himself: if he be in another,
then are they two: if he be in himself, they are also two, the comprising and the
comprised. According to these rules or doctrines, the Nature of things is but a false or
vain shadow. I have ever thought this manner of speech in a Christian is full of
indiscretion and irreverence; God cannot dye, God cannot gain-say himself, God cannot
do this or that. I cannot allow a man should so bound Gods heavenly power under the
Lawes of our word. And that apparence, which in these propositions offers itself unto us,
ought to be represented more reverently and more religiously. Our speech has his
infirmities and defects, as all things else have. Most of the occasions of this worlds
troubles are Grammaticall. Our suits and processes proceed but from the canvasing and
debating the interpretation of the Lawes, and most of our wars from the want of
knowledge in State-counsellors, that could not cleerely distinguish and fully express the
Covenants and Conditions of accords betweene Prince and Prince. How many weighty
strifes and important quarels has the doubt of this one sillable, hoc, brought forth in the
world? Examine the plainest sentence that Logike itself can present unto us. If you say,
it is fair weather, and in so saying, say true, it is fair weather then. Is not this a certain
form of speech? Yet will it deceive us: That it is so, let us follow the example: If you say,

I lie, and in that you should say true, you lie then. The Art, the reason, the force of the
conclusion of this last, are like unto the other; notwithstanding we are entangled. I see the
Pyrrhonian philosophers, who can by no manner of speech express their general conceit:
for they had need of a new language. Ours is altogether composed of affirmative
propositions, which are directly against them. So that when they say I doubt, you have
them fast by the throat to make them avow that at least you are assured and know that they
doubt. So have they been compelled to save themselves by this comparison of Physicke,
without which their conceit would be inexplicable and intricate. When they pronounce, I
know not, or I doubt, they say that this proposition transportes itself together with the
rest, even as the Rewbarbe doeth, which scowred ill humors away, and therewith is
carried away himself. This conceipt is more certainly conceived by an interrogation:
What can I tell? As I bear it in an Imprese of a pair of ballances. Note how some
prevaile with this kind of unreverent and unhallowed speech. In the disputations that are
nowadayes in our religion, if you overmuch urge the adversaries, they will roundly tell
you that it lieth not in the power of God to make his body at once to be in Paradise and on
earth, and in many other places together. And how that ancient skoffer made profitable
use of it. At least (says he) it is no small comfort unto man to see that God cannot do all
things; for he cannot kill himself if he would, which is the greatest benefit we have in our
condition; he cannot make mortal men immortall nor raise the dead to life again, nor
make him that has lived never to have lives, and him who has h ad honors not to have
had them, having no other right over what is past, but of forgetfulnesse. And that this
society betweene God and Man may also be combined with some pleasant examples, he
cannot make twice ten not to be twenty. See what, he says, and which a Christian ought to
abhor, that ever such and so profane words should pass his mouth: Whereas, on the
contrary part, it seems that foolish men endeavor to find out this foolish-boldness of
speech, that so they may turn and winde God almighty according to their measure.
-----cras vel atra
Nube polum pater occupato,
Vel sole puro, non tamen irritum
Quodcumque retro est efficiet, neque
Diffinget effectumque reddet
Quod fugiens semel hora vexit. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. xxix. 43.
To morrow let our father fill the skie,
With darke cloud, or with clear Sunne, he thereby
Shall not make voyd what once is overpast:
Nor shall he undoe, or in new mold cast,
What time has once caught, that flyeth hence so fast.
When we say that the infinite of ages, as well past as to come, is but one instant with
God; that his wisdom, goodnesse and power, are one self-same thing with his essence;
our tongue speaks it, but our understanding can no whit apprehend it. Yet will our self

overweening sift his divinitie through our sieve: whence are engendered all the vanities
and errours wherewith this world is so full-fraught, reducing and weighing with his
uncertaine balance a thing so far from his reach, and so distant from his weight. Mirum
quo procedat improbitas cordis humani, parvulo aliquo invitata successu. (Plin. Nast.
Hist. ii. c. 23.) ’It is a wonder whither the perverse wickednesse of mans heart will
proceed, if it be but called-on with any little success.’ How insolently do the Stoics
charge Epicurus, because he holds that to be perfectly good and absolutely happy belongs
but only unto God; and that the wise man has but a shadow and similitude thereof? How
rashly have they joined God unto destiny? (Which at my request, let none that beareth the
surname of a Christian do at this day.) And Thales, Plato, and Pythagoras have subjected
him unto necessities. This over-boldness, or rather bold-fiercenesse, to seek to discover
God by and with our eyes, has been the cause that a notable man of our times has
attributed a corporall form unto divinitie, and is the cause of that which daily happens
unto us, which is by a particular assignation to impute all important events to God: which
because they touch us, it seems they also touch him, and that he regardeth them with
more care and attention than those that are but slight and ordinary unto us. Magna dii
curant, parva negligunt: (Cic. Nat. Deor. ii.) ’The Gods take some care for great things,
but none for little.’ Note his example; he will enlighten you with his reason. Nec in regnis
quidem reges omnia minima curant: (Cic. Ibid. ii.) ’Nor do Kings in their Kingdomes
much care for the least matters.’ As if it were all one to that King, either to remove an
Empire or a leafe of a tree: and if his providence were otherwise exercised, inclining or
regarding no more the success of a battle than the skip of a flea. The hand of his
government affords itself to all things after a like tenure, fashion and order; our interest
addeth nothing unto it: our motions and our measures concerne him nothing and move
him no whit. Deus ita artifex magnus in magnis, ut minor non sit in parvis: ’God is so
great a workman in great things, as he is no less in small things.’ Our arrogancie setteth
ever before us this blasphemous equality, because our occupations charge us. Strato has
presented the Gods with all immunitie of offices, as are their Priests. He maketh nature to
produce and preserve al l things, and by her weights and motions to compact all parts of
the world, discharging humane nature from the fear of divine judgments. Quod beatum
æternumque sit, id nec habere, negotii quicquam, nec exhibere alteri; (Cic. Ibid. i.) ’That
which is blessed and eternall, nor is troubled itself, nor troubleth others.’ Nature wills
that in all things likewise there be also like relation. Then the infinite number of mortal men
concludeth a like number of immortall: The infinite things that kill and destroy presuppose
as many that preserve and profit. As the soules of the Gods, sanse tougues, sanse eyes, and
sanse ears, have each one, in themselves a feeling of that which the other feel, and judge
of our thoughts; so mens soules, when they are free and severed from the body, either by
sleepe or any distraction, divine, prognosticate and see things, which being conjoyned to
their bodies, they could not see. Men, says Saint Paul, when they professed themselves to
be wise, they became fooles, for the y turned the glory of the incorruptible God to the
similitude of the image of a corruptible man (Rom. i. 22,23.). Marke, I pray you, a little
the iugling of ancient Deifications. After the great, solemn and prowd pompe of funerals,
when the fire began to burne the top of the Pyramis, and to take hold of the bed or hearce

wherein the dead corps lay, even at that instant they let fly an Eagle, which taking her
flight aloft upward, signified that the soul went directly to Paradise. We have yet a
thousand medailes and monuments, namely, of that honest woman Faustina, wherein that
Eagle is represented carrying a cocke-horse up towards heaven those deified soules. It is
pity we should so deceive ourselves with our own foolish devises and apish inventions,
Quod finxere timent, -- Lucan. i. 484.
Of that they stand in fear,
Which they in fancie bear,
as children will be afeard of their fellowes visage, which themselves have besmeared and
blackt. Quasi quicquam infælicius sit homine, cui sua figmenta dominantur: ’As though
any thing were more wretched than man over whom his own imaginations bear sway
and domineere.’ To honor him whom we have made is far from honouring him that
has made us. Augustus had as many Temples as Jupiter and served with as much religion
and opinion of miracles. The Thracians, in requitall of the benefits they had received of
Agesilaus, came to tell him how they had canonized him. ’Hath your Nation,’ said he, ’the
power to make those whom it pleaseth Gods? Then first (for example sake) make one of
yourselves, and when I shall have seen what good he shall have thereby, I will then
thanke you for your offer.’ Oh sencelesse man, who cannot possibly make a worme, and
yet will make Gods by dozens. Listen to Trismegistus when he praises our sufficiencie:
For man to find out divine nature, and to make it, has surmounted the admiration of all
admirable things. See here arguments out of Philosophies schooles itself.
Noscere cui Divos et coeli numina soli,
Aut soli nescire datum. -- Lucan. i. 452.
Only to whom heav’ns Deities to know,
Only to whom is giv’n, them not to know.
If God be, he is a living creature; if he be a living creature, he has sense; and if he have
sense, he is subject to corruption. If he be without a body, he is without a soul, and
consequently without action: and if he have a body, he is corruptible. Is not this brave?
We are incapable to have made the world, then is there some more excellent nature that
has set her helping hand unto it. Were it not a sottish arrogancie that we should think
ourselves to be the perfectest thing of this universe? Then sure there is some better thing.
And that is God. When you see a rich and stately mansion house, although you know not
who is owner of it , yet will you not say that it was built for rats. And this more than
humane frame and divine composition, which we see, of heavens pallace, must we not
deem it to be the mansion of some Lord greater than ourselves? Is not the highest ever
the most worthy? And we are seated in the lowest place. Nothing that is without a soul

and void of reason is able to bring forth a living soul capable of reason. The world does
bring us forth, then the world has both soul and reason. Each part of us is less than
ourselves, we are part of the world, then the world is stored with wisdom and with
reason, and that more plenteously than we are. It is a goodly thing to have a great
government. Then the worlds government belongeth to some blessed and happy nature.
The Starres annoy us not, then the Starres are full of goodnesse. We have need of
nourishment, then so have the Gods, and feed themselves with the vapours arising here
below. Worldly goods are not goods unto God. Then are not they goods unto us. To
offend and to be offended are equall witnesses of imbecility: Then it is folly to, fear
God. God is good by his own nature, man by his industry: which is more? Divine
wisdom and mans wisdom have no other distinction but that the first is eternall. Now
lastingnesse is an accession unto wisdom. Therefore are we fellowes. We have life
reason, and liberty, we esteeme goodnesse, charitie and justice; these qualities are then in
him. In conclusion, the building and destroying the conditions of divinity are forged by
man according to the relation to himself. Oh what a patterne, and what a model! Let us
raise and let us amplifie humane qualities as much as we please. Puffe-up your self poore
man, indeed swell and swell again.
------ non si te ruperis, inquit. -- Hor. Serm. ii. Sat. iii. 324.
Swell till you breake, you shall not be,
Equall to that great one, quoth he.
Profecto non teum, quem cogitare non possunt, sed semetipsos pro illo cogitantes, non
illum, sed seipsos, non illi, sed sibi comparant. ’Of a truth, they conceiting not God, whom
they cannot conceive, but themselves instead of God, do not compare him, but
themselves, not to him but themseves.’ In natural things the effects do but halfe refer
their causes. What this? It is above natures order, its condition is too high, too far out of
reach, and overswaying to endure, that our conclusions should seize upon or fetter the
same. It is not by our means we reach unto it, this traine is too low. We are no nerer
heaven on the top of Sina mount than in the bottome of the deepest sea: Consider of it that
you may see with your Astrolabe. They bring God even to the carnall acquaintance of
women, to a prefixed number of times, and to how many generations. Paulina, wife unto
Saturnius, a matron of great reputation in Rome, supposing to lie with the God Serapis,
by the maquerelage of the priests of that Temple, found herself in the arms of a wanton
lover of hers. Varro, the most subtill and wisest Latine Author, in his bookes of divinitie
writeth that Hercules his Sextaine, with one hand casting lots for himself, and with the
other for Hercules, gaged a supper and a wench against him: if he won, at the charge of
his offerings, but if he lost, at his own cost. He lost, and paid for a supper and a wench:
her name was Laurentina: who by the night saw that God in her arms, saying moreover
unto her that the next day the first man she met withall should heavenly pay her her
wages. It was fortuned to be one Taruncius, a very rich young man, who took her home
with him, and in time left her absolute heir of all he had. And she, when it came to her
turn, hoping to do that God some acceptable service, left the Roman people heir
general or all her wealth. And therefore she had divine honors attributed unto her. As if
it were not sufficient for Plato to descend originally from the Gods by a twofold line, and
to have Neptune for the common author of his race. It was certainly beleeved at Athens
that Ariston, desiring to enjoy fair Perictyone, he could not, and that in his dreame he
was warned by God Apollo to leave her untoucht and unpolluted until such time as she
were brought a bed. And these were the father and mother of Plato. How many such-like
cuckoldries are there in histories, procured by the Gods against seely mortal men? And
husbands most injuriously blazoned in favor of their children? In Mahomets religion, by
the easy beleefe of that people are many Merlins found, that is to say, fatherless children:
spirituall children, conceived and borne divinely in the wombs of virgins, and that in their
language bear names importing as much. We must note that nothing is more dear and
precious to any thing than its own being (the Lyon, the Eagle and the Dolphin esteeme
nothing above their kind), each thing referreth the qualities of all other things unto her
own conditions, which we may either amplifie or shorten; but that is all: for besides this
principle, and out of this reference, our imagination cannot go, and guesse further: and it
is unpossible it should exceed that, or go beyond it. Whence arise these ancient
conclusions. Of all formes, that of man is the fairest: then God is of this form. No man
can be happy without virtue, nor can virtue be without reason; and no reason can lodge
but in a humane shape: God is then invested with a humane figure. Ita est informatum
anticipatum mentibus nostris, ut homini, quum de Deo cogitet, forma occurrat humana:
(Cic. Nat. Deo. i.) ’The prejudice forestaled in our mindes is so framed as the form of
man comes to mans mind when he is thinking of God.’ Therefore Xenophanes said
presently, that if beasts frame any Gods unto themselves, as likely it is they do, they surely
frame them like unto themselves,and glorifle themselves as we do. For why may not a
goose say thus? All parts of the world behold me, the earth serveth me to tread upon, the
Sunne to give me light, the Starres to inspire me with influence; this commoditie I have of
the wind, and this benefit of the waters: there is nothing that this worlds-vault does so
favourably look upon as me self; I am the favorite of nature; is it not man that careth for
me, that keepeth me, lodgeth me, and serveth me? For me it is he soweth, reapeth, and
grindeth: if he eat me, so does man feed on his fellow and so do I on the wormes that
consume and eat him. As much might a Crane say, indeed more boldly, by reason of her
flights liberty, and the possession of this goodly and high-bownding region. Tam blanda
conciliatrix, et tam sui est lena ipsa natura: (Cic. Nat. Deo. ibid.) ’So flattring a broker
and bawd (as it were) is nature to itself.’ Now by the same consequence the destinies are
for us, the world is for us; it shineth, and thundreth for us: both the creator and the
creatures are for us: it is the marke and point whereat the universitie of things aymeth.
Survay but the register which Philosophy has kept these two thousand years and more, of
heavenly affairs. The Gods never acted, and never spake, but for man: She ascribeth no
other consultation, nor imputeth other vacation unto them. See how they are up in arms
against us.
-----domitosque Herculea manu

Telluris iuvenes, unde periculum
Fulgens contremuit domus Saturni veteris. -- Hor. Car. ii. Od. xii. 6.
And young earth-gallants tamed by the hand
Of Hercules, whereby the habitation
Of old Saturnus did in perill stand,
And, shyn’d it ne’er so bright, yet fear’d invasion.
See how they are partakers of our troubles, that so they may be even with us, forasmuch
as so many times we tire partakers of theirs.
Neptunus muros magnogue emota tridenti
Fundamenta quatit, totamque a sedibus urbem
Eruit: hic Iuno Scæas saavissima portas Prima tenet. -- Virg. Æn.ii. 160.
Neptunas with his great three-forked mace
Shaks the weake wall, and tottering foundation,
And from the site the Cittie does displace,
Fierce Juno first holds ope the gates t’invasion.
The Caunians, for the jelousie of their own Gods dominations upon their devotion day
arm themselves, and running up and down, brandishing and striking the air with their
glaives, and in this earnest manner they expell all foraine and banish all strange Gods
from out their territories. Their powers are limited according to our necessitie. Some heale
horses, some cure men, some the plague, some the scald, some the cough, some one kind
of scab, and some another: Adeo minimis etiam rebus prava religio inserit Deos: ’This
corrupt religion engageth and inserteth Gods even in the least matters:’ some make
grapes to growe, and some garlike; some have the charge of bawdrie and uncleanesse, and
some of merchandise: to every kind of trades-man a God. Some one has his province
and credit in the East, and some in the West:
-----hic illius arma
Hic currus fuit. -- Virg. Æn.i. 20.
His armor here
His chariots there appeare.
O sancte Apollo, qui umbilicum certum terrarum obtines. -- Cic. Div. ii.
Sacred Apollo, who enfoldest
The earths set navell,
and it holdest.

Pallada Cecropiæ, Minoia Creta Dianam,
Vulcanum tellus Hipsi illa colit.
Iunonem Sparte, Pelopeiadesque Mycena,
Pinigerum Fauni Mænalis ora caput:
Mars Latio venerandus. -- Ovid. Fast. iii. 81.
Besmeared with blood and goare.
Th’Athenians Pallas; Minos-Candy coast
Diana, Lemnos Vulcan honors most;
Mycene and Sparta, Juno think divine;
The coast of Mænalus Faune crown’d with pine;
Latium does Mars adore.
Some has but one borough or family in his possession: some lodgeth alone, and some
in company, either voluntarily or necessarily.
Iunctaque sunt magno templa nepotis avo. -- i. 294.
To the great grand-sires shrine,
The nephews temples do combine.
Some there are so seely and popular (for their number amounteth to six and thirty
thousand) that five or six of them must be shufled up together to produce an eare of corne,
and thereof they take their severall names. Three to a doore, one to be the boards, one to
be the hinges, and the third to be the threshold. Foure to a child, as protectors of his
bandels, of his drinke, of his meat, and of his sucking. Some are certain, others
uncertaine, some doubtfull, and some that come not yet into paradise.
Quos, quoniam coeli nondum dignamur honore,
Quas dedimus certe terras habitare sinamus. -- Ovid. Metam. i. 194.
Whom for as yet with heav’n we have not graced,
Let them on earth by our good grant be placed.
There are some Philosophicall, some poeticall, and some civill, some of a meane
condition, betweene divine and humane nature, mediators and spokes-men betweene us
and God: worshipped in a kind of second or diminutive order of adoration: infinite in
titles and offices: some good, some bad, som e old and crazed, and some mortal. For
Chrysippus thought that in the last conflagration or burning of the world, all the Gods
should have an end, except Jupiter. Man faineth a thousand pleasant societies betweene
God and him. Nay, is he not his countrieman?

-----Iovis incunabula Creten. -- Ovid. Met. viii. 99.
The Ile of famous Creet,
For Jove a cradle meet.
Behold the excuse that Scævola, chief Bishop, and Varro, a great Divine, in their dayes,
give us upon the consideration of this subject. It is necessary (say they) that man be
altogether ignorant of true things, and believe many false. Quum veritatem qua liberetur,
inquirat; credatur ei expedite, quod fallitur: ’Since they seek the truth, whereby they may
be free, let us believe it is expedient for them to be deceived.’ Mans eye cannotr perceive
things but by the formes of his knowledge. And we remember not the downfall of
miserable Phæton, forasmuch as he undertook to guide the reins of his fathers steeds
with a mortal hand. Our mind does still relapse into the same depth, and by her own
temeritie does dissipate and bruise itself. If you enquire of Philosophy what matter the
Sun is composed of, what will it answer? but of yron and stone, or other stuffe for his use.
Demand of Zeno what Nature is? A fire (says he), an Artist fit to engender and proceeding
orderly. Archimedes, master of this Science, and who in truth and certaintie assumeth unto
himself a precedencie above all others, says the Sunne is a God of enflamed yron. Is not
this a quaint imagination, produced by the inevitable necessitie of Geometricall
demonstrations? Yet not so unavoidable and beneficiall, but Socrates has been of
opinion that it sufficed to know so much of it as that a man might measure out the land he
either demized or took to rent: and that Polyænus, who therein had been a famous and
principal Doctor after he had tasted the sweet fruits of the lazie, idle and delicious
gardens of Epicurus, did not contemne them as full of falsehood and apparent vanity.
Socrates, in Xenophon, upon this point of Anaxagoras, allowed and esteemed of
antiquitie, well seen and expert above all others in heavenly and divine matters, says,
that he weakened his braines much, as all men do, who over nicely and greedily will
search out those knowledges which hang not for their mowing nor pertaine unto them.
When he would needs have the sunn to be a burning stone, he remembered not that stone
does not shine in the fire; and which is more, that it consumes therein. And when he made
the Sunne and fire to be all one, he forgot that fire does not tan and black those he looketh
upon; that we fixly looke upon the fire, and that fire consumeth and killeth all plants and
herbs. According to the advice of Socrates and mine, ’The wisest judging of heaven is not
to judge of it at all.’ Plato in his Timeus, being to speak of Dæmons and spirits, says it is
an enterprise far exceeding my skill and ability: we must believe what those ancient
forefathers has said of them, who have said to have been engendred by them. It is
against reason not to give credit unto the children of the Gods, although their sayings be
neither grounded upon necessary nor likely reasons, since they tell us that they speak of
familiar and household matters. Let us see whether we have a little more insight in the
knowledge of humane and natural things. Is it not a foolish enterprise to those unto which,
by our own confession, our learning cannot possibly attaine, to devise and forge them
another body, and of our own invention to give them a false form? as is seen in the

planetary motions, unto which because our mind cannot reach, nor imagine their natural
conduct, we lend them something of ours, that is to say, materiall, grose, and corporall
springs and wards:
----- temo aureus, aurea summæ
Curvatura rota, radiorum argenteus ordo. -- Ovid. Met. ii. 107.
The Axe-tree gold, the wheeles whole circle gold,
The rank of raies did all of silver hold.
You would say, we have the Coach-makers, Carpenters, and Painters, who have gone up
thither, and there have placed engines with diverse motions, and ranged the wheelings, the
windings and enterlacements of the celestial bodies diapred in colours, according to Plato,
about the spindle of necessity.
Mundus domus est maximna rerum,
Quam quinque altitonæ fragmine zonæ
Cingunt, per quam limbus pictus bis sex signis,
Stellimicantibus, altus, in obliquo æthere, Lunæ
Bigas acceptat.
The world, of things the greatest habitation,
Which five high-thundring Zones by separation
Engird, through which a scarfe depainted fair
With twice six signes star-shining in the aire.
Obliquely raisde, the waine
O’ the Moone does entertaine.
They are all dreames, and mad follies. Why will not nature one day be pleased to open
her bosome to us, and make us perfectly see the means and conduct of her motions, and
enable our eyes to judge of them? Oh, good God, what abuses, and what distractions
should we find in our poor understanding and weake knowledge! I am deceived if she
hold one thing directly in its point, and I shall part hence more ignorant of all other things
than mine ignorance. Have I not seen this divine saying in Plato, that Nature is nothing
but an ænigmaticall poesie? As a man might say, an overshadowed and darke picture,
enter-shining with an infinite varietie of false lights, to exercise our conjectures: Latent
ista omnia crassis occultata et circumfusa tenebris: ut nulla acies humani ingenii tanta
sit, quæ pene trare incælum, terram intrare possit: (Cic. Acad. Q. iv.) ’All these things lie
hid so veiled and environed with misty darknesse, as no edge of man is so piersant as it
can pass into heaven or dive into the earth.’ And truly Philosophy is nothing else but a
sophisticated poesie: whence have these ancient authors all their authorities but from
poets? And the first were poets themselves, and in their art treated the same. Plato is but a

loose poet. All high and more than humane sciences are decked and enrobed with a
poeticall style. Even as women, when their natural teeth faile them, use some of yuorie
and in stead of a true beauties or lively colour, lay on some artificiall hew; and as they
make trunk sleeves of wire, and whale-bone bodies, backes of lathes, and stiffe bombasted
verdugals, and to the open-view of all men paint and embellish themselves with
counterfeit and borrowed beauties; so does learning (and our law has, as some say,
certain lawfull fictions, on which it groundeth the truth of justice) which in liew of
currant payment and presupposition, delivereth us those things, which she herself
teacheth us to be meere inventions: for these Epicycles Excentriques, and Concentriques,
which Astrology useth to direct the state and motions of her starres, she gives them unto
us, as the best she could ever invent, to fit and sute unto this subject: as in all things else,
Philosophy presenteth unto us, not that which is or she beleeveth, but what she inventeth
as having most apparence, likelihood, or comelinesse. Plato upon the discourse of our
bodies estate and of that of beasts: that what we have said is true we would be assured of it
had we but the confirmation of some oracle to confirme it. This only we warrant, that it is
the likeliest we could say. It is not to heaven alone that she sendeth her cordages, her
engines, and her wheeles. Let us but somewhat consider what she says of ourselves and
of our contexture. There is no more retrogradation, trepidation, augmentation, recoyling,
and violence in the starres and celestiall bodies than they have feigned and devised in this,
poor seeley little body of man. Verily they have thence had reason to name it
Microcosmos, or little world, so many severall parts and visages have they imploied to
fashion and frame the same. To accommodate the motions which they see in man, the
diverse functions and faculties that we feel in ourselves. Into how many severall parts have
they divided our soul? Into how many seats have they placed her? Into how many orders,
stages, and stations have they divided this wretched man, beside the natural and
perceptible? and to how many distinct offices and vocations? They make a public
imaginarie thing of it. It is a subject which they hold and handle: they have all power
granted them to rip him, to sever him, to range him, to join and reunite him together
again, and to stuffe him every one according to his fantasia; and yet they neither have nor
possess him. They cannot so order or rule him, not in truth only, but in imagination, but
still some cadence or sound is discovered which escapeth their architecture, bad as it is,
and botched together with a thousand false patches and fantastic peeces. And they have
no reason to be excused: for to painters when they portray the heaven, the earth, the seas,
the hills, the scattered Ilands, we pardon them if they but represent us with some slight
apparence of them; and as of things unknown we are contented with such feigned
shadows. But when they draw us, or any other subject that is familiarly known unto us, to
the life, then seek we to draw from them a perfect and exact representation of their or our
true lineaments or colours, and scorne if they misse never so little. I commend the
Milesian wench, who seeing Thales the Philosopher continually amusing himself in the
contemplation of heavens w ide-bounding vault, and ever holding his eyes aloft, laid
something in his way to make him stumble, thereby to warne and put him in mind that he
should not amuse his thoughts about matters above the clouds before he had provided for
and well considered those at his feet. Verily she advised him well, and it better became

him rather to looke to himself than to gaze on heaven; for, as Democritus by the mouth
of Cicero says,
Quod este ante pedes, nemo spectat; coli scrutantur plagas -- Cic. Div. ii.
No man looks what before his feet does lie,
They seek and search the climates of the skie.
But our condition beareth that the knowledge of what we touch with our hands and have
amongst us, is as far from us and above the clouds as that of the stars. As says Socrates in
Plato, that one may justly say to him who meddles with Philosophy, as the woman said to
Thales, which is, he seeth nothing of th at which is before him. For every Philosopher is
ignorant of what his neighbour does; indeed, he knowes not what himself does, and wots not
what both are, whether beasts or men. These people who think Sebondes reasons to be
weake and lame, who know nothing themselves, and yet will take upon them to governe
the world and know all:
Quæ mare compescant causæ, quid temperet annum,
Stellæ sponte sua, jussæve vagentur et errent:
Quid premat obscuræ Lunæ, quid profer at orbem,
Quid velit et possit rerum concordia discors. -- Hor. i. Epist. xii. 16.
What cause does calm the Sea, what cleares the yeare,
Whether Stars force’t, or of self-will appeares;
What makes the Moones darke Orbe to wax or wane,
What friendly fewd of things both will and can.
Did they never sound amid their books the difficulties that present themselves to them
to know their own being? We see very well that our finger stirreth and our foot moveth,
that some parts of our body move of themselves without our leave, and other some that
stirr but at our pleasure: and we see that certain apprehensions engender a blushing-red
colour, others a palenesse; that some imagination does only work in the milt, another in
the braine; some one enduceth us to laugh, another causeth us to weep; some astonisheth
and stupifieth all our senses, and staieth the motion of all our limbs; at some object the
stomake riseth, and at some other the lower parts. But how a spirituall impression causeth
or worketh such a dent or flaw in a massie and solid body or subject, and the nature of the
conjoyning and compacting of these admirable springs and wards, man yet never knew:
Omnia incerta ratione, et in naturæ majestate abdita: (Plin.) ’All uncertaine in reason,
and hid in the majesty of nature.’ Saith Plinie and Saint Augustine: Modus, quo
corporibus adhærent spiritus, omnino mirus est nec comprehendi ab homine potent, et hoc
ipso homo est: (Aug. De Spir. et Anim.) ’The meane is clearely wonderful whereby spirits
cleave to our bodies, nor can it be comprehended by man, and that is very man.’ Yet is

there no doubt made of him: for mens opinions are received after ancient beliefs by
authority and upon credit; as if it were a religion and a law. What is commonly held of it,
is received as a gibrish or fustian tongue. This trueth, with all her framing of arguments
and proporcioning of proofes, is received as a firme and solid body which is no more
shaken, which is no more judged. On the other side, every one the best he can patcheth up
and comforteth this received beliefe with all the means his reason can afford him, which
is an instrument very supple, pliable, and yielding to all shapes. ’Thus is the world filled
with toyes, and overwhelmed in lies and leasings.’ The reason that men doubt not much of
things is that common impressions are never throughly tride and sifted, their ground is not
sounded, nor where the fault and weaknes lieth. Men only debate and question of the
branch, not of the tree: they aske not whether a thing be true, but whether it was
understood or meant thus and thus. They enquire not whether Galen has spoken any thing
of worth, but whether thus, or so, or otherwise. Truly there was some reason this bridle or
restraint of our judgements liberty, and this tyranny over our beliefs should extend itself
even to schooles and arts. The God of scholasticall learning is Aristotle: It is religion to
debate of his ordinances, as those of Lycurgus in Sparta. His doctrine is to us as a canon
law, which perhaps is as false as another. I know not why I should or might not, as
soone and as easy accept either Platoes Ideas, or Epicurus his atomes and indivisible
things, or the fulnesse and emptines of Leucippus and Democritus, or the water of Thales,
or Anaximanders infinite of nature, or the aire of Diogenes, or the numbers or proportion
of Pythagoras, or the infinite of Parmenides, or the single-one of Musæus, or the water
and fire of Apollodorus, or the similarie and resembling parts of Anaxagoras, or the
discord and concord of Empedocles, or the fire of Heraclitus, or an other opinion (of this
infinit confusion of opinions and sentences which this goodly humane reason, by her
certainty and clear-sighted vigilancie brings forth in what soever it meddles withal) as I
should of Aristotle’s conceit, touching this subject of the principles of natural things,
which he frameth of three parts; that is to say, matter, form, and privation. And what
greater vanity can there be than to make inanitie itself the cause of the production of
things? Privation is a negative: with what humor could he make it the cause and
beginning of things that are? Yet durst no man move that but for an exercise of logike:
wherein nothing is disputed to put it in doubt, but to defend the author of the schoole from
strange objections. His authority is the marke beyond which it is not lawfull to enquire. It
is easy to frame what one list upon allowed foundations: for, according to the law and
ordinance of this positive beginning, the other parts of the frame are easily directed
without crack or danger. By which way we find our reason well grounded, and we
discourse without rub or let in the way: For our masters preoccupate and gains afore-hand
as much place in our beleefe as they need to conclude afterward what they please, as
geometricians do by their graunted questions: the consent and approbation which we lend
them, giving them wherewith to draw us, either on the right or left hand, and at their
pleasure to winde and turn us. Whosoever is beleeved in his presuppositions, he is our
master, and our God. He will lay the plot of his foundations so ample and easy, that, if he
list, he will carrie us up, even unto the clouds. In this practice or negotiation of learning,
we have taken the saying of Pythagoras for currant payment; which is, that every expert

man ought to be bielieved in his own trade. The logitian referreth himself to the
grammarian for the Signification of words. The rhetoritian borroweth the places of
arguments from the logitian; the poet his measures from the musician; the geometrician
his proportions from the arithmetician; the metaphisikes take the conjectures of the
physikes for a ground, for every art has her presupposed principles by which mans
judgment is bridled on all parts. If you come to the shocke or front of this barre, in which
consists the principal error, they immediately pronounce this sentence: that there is no
disputing against such as deny principles. There can be no principles in men, except
divinitie has revealed them unto them: all the rest, both beginning, middle, and end, is but
a dreame and a vapor. Those that argue by presupposition, we must presuppose against
them the very same axiome which is disputed of. For, each humane presupposition, and
every invention, unless reason make a difference of it, has as much authority as another.
So must they all be equally balanced, and first the general and those that tyrannize us. A
persuasion of certaintie is a manifest testimony of foolishnesse, and of extreme
uncertaintie. And no people are less philosophers and more foolish than Platoe’s
Philodoxes, or lovers of their own opinions. We must know whether fire be hot, whether
snow be white, whether, in our knowledge, there be anything hard or soft. And touching
the answers, whereof they tell old tales, as to him who made a doubt of heat, to whom one
replied, that to trie he should caste himself into the fire; to him that denied the yce to be
cold, that he should put some in his bosome; they are most unworthy the profession of a
philosophers. If they had left us in our own natural estate, admitting of strange
apparences as they present themselves unto us by our senses, and had suffered us to
follow our natural appetites, directed by the condition of our birth, they should then have
reason to speak so. But from them it is that we have learnt to become judges of the world;
it is from them we hold this conceit, that mans reason is the general controuler of all that
is, both without and within heavens-vault, which imbraceth all and can do all, by means
whereof all things are known and discerned. This answer were good among the canibals,
who without any of Aristotles precepts, or so much as knowing the name of natural
philosophy, enjoy most happily a long, a quiet, and a peaceable life. This answer might
perhaps avail more, and be of more force, than all those they can borrow from their reason
and invention. All living creatures, indeed, beasts and all, where the commandment of the
natural law is yet pure and simple, might with us be capable of this answer, but they have
renounced it. They shall not need to tell me it is true, for you both hear and see it is so.
They must tell me if what I think I feel, I feel the same in effect; and if I feel it, then let
them tell me why I feel it, and how and what. Let them tell me the name, the
beginning, the tennons, and the abuttings of heat and of cold, with the qualities of him that
is agent, or of the patient: or let them quit me their profession, which is neither to admit
nor approve anything by way of reason. It is their touchstone to try all kinds of essayes.
But surely it is a touchstone full of falsehood, errors, imperefection and weakenesse:
which way can we better make trial of it than by itself? If she may not be credited
speaking of herself, I hardly can she be fit to judge of strange matters. If she know
anything, it can be but her being and domicile. She is in the soul, and either a part or
effect of the same. For the true and essential reason ( whose name we steal by false

signes) lodgeth in Gods bosome. There is her home, and there is her retreat, thence she
takes her flight when Gods pleasure is that we shall see some glimps of it: even as Pallas
issued out of her fathers head, to communicate and empart herself unto the world. Now
let us see what mans reason has taught us of herself and of the soul: not of the soul in
general, whereof well nigh all philosophy maketh both the celestiall and first bodies
partakers; not of that which Thales attributed even unto things that are reputed without
soul or life, drawne thereunto by the consideration of the Adamant stone: but of that
which appertaineth to us, and which we should know best.
Iqnoratur enim quæ, sit natura animai,
Nata sit, an contra nascentibus insinuetur,
Et simul intereat nobiscum morte dirempta,
An tenebras orci visat, vastasque lacunas,
An pecudes alias di vinitus insinuet se. -- Lucr. i. 113.
What the soules nature is, we do not know:
If it be bred, or put in those are bred,
Whether by death divorst with us it go,
Or see the darke vast lakes of hell below,
Or into other creatures turn the head.
To Crates and Dicæarchus it seemed that there was none at all; but that the body stirred
thus with and by a natural motion: to Plato, that it was a substance moving of itself; to
Thales, a Nature without rest; to Asclepiades, an exercitation of the senses; to Hesiodus
and Anaximander, a thing composed of earth and water; to Parmenides; of earth and fire;
to Empedocles, of blood:
Sanguineam vomit ille animam. -- Virg. Æn. ix. 349.
His soul of purple-blood he vomits out.
To Possidoinus, Cleanthes, and Galen, a heat, or hot complexion:
Igneus est ollis vigor, et coelestis origo: -- vi. 730.
A firy vigor and celestiall spring,
In their originall they strangely bring.
To Hyppocrates, a spirit dispersed through the body; to Varro, an air received in at the
mouth, heated in the lungs, tempered in the heart, and dispersed through all parts of the
body; to Zeno, the quintessence of the foure elements; to Heraclides Ponticus, the light; to
Xenocrates and to the Egyptians, a moving number; to the Chaldeans, a virtue without

any determinate form.
-----Habitum quemdam vitalem corporis esse,
Harmoniam Gæci quam dicunt. -- Lucr. iii. 100.
There of the body is a vital frame,
The which the Greeks a harmony do name.
And not forgetting Aristotle, that which naturally causeth the body to move, who calleth
it Entelechy, or perfection moving of itself (as cold an invention as any other), for he
neither speaks of the essence, nor of the beginning nor of the soules nature, but only
noteth the effects of it: Lactantius, Seneca, and the better part amongst the Dogmatists,
have confessed they never understood what it was: and after all this rable of opinions.
Harum sententiarum quæ vera sit, Deus aliquis viderit: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. i.) ’Which of these
opinions is true, let some God looke unto it,’ says Cicero. I know by myself, quoth Saint
Bernard, how God is incomprehensible, since I am not able to comprehend the parts of
my own being: Heraclitus, who held that every place was full of Soules and Demons,
maintained nevertheless that a man could never go so far towards the knowledge of the
soul as that he could come unto it; so deep and mysterious was her essence. There is no
less dissention nor disputing about the place where she should be seated. Hypocrates and
Herophilus place it in the ventricle of the brain: Democritus and Aristotle, through all the
body:
Ut bona scope valetudo cum dicitur esse
Corporis, et non est tanten hæc pars ulla valentis. -- Lucr. iii. 103.
As health is of the body said to be,
Yet is no part of him in health we see.
Epicurus in the stomacke.
Hic exultat enim pavor ac metus, hæc loca circum
Lætitiæ mulcent. -- 142.
For in these places fear does domineere,
And near these places joy keepes merry cheere.
The Stoices, within and about the heart; Erasistratus, joyning the membrane of the
Epicranium: Empedocles, in the blood: as also Moses, which was the cause he forbade the
eating of beasts blood, unto which their soul is commixed: Galen thought that every part
of the body had his soul: Strato has placed it betweene the two upper eyelids: Qua facie
quidem sit animus aut ubi habitet, nec quærendum quidem est: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. i.) ’We

must not so much as enquire what face the mind bears, or where it dwells,’ says Cicero.
I am well pleased to let this man use his own words: for why should I alter the speech of
eloquence itself? since there is small gain in stealing matter from his inventions: They
are both little used, not very forcible, and little unknown. But the reason why Chrysippus
and those of his sect will prove the soul to be about the heart, is not to be forgotten. It is
(says he) because when we will affirme or swear anything, we lay our hand upon the
stomacke; and when we will pronounce εγω, which signifieth my self, we put down our
chin towards the stomacke. This passage ought not to be past-over without noting the
vanity of so great a personage: for, besides that his considerations are of themselves very
slight, the latter proveth but to the Græcians that they have their soul in that place. No
humane judgement is so vigilant or Argoes-eied, but sometimes shall fall asleep or
slumber. What shall we fear to say? Behold the Stoices, fathers of humane wisdom,
who devise that the soul of man, overwhelmed with any ruine, laboureth and panteth a
long time to get out, unable to free herself from that charge, even as a mouse taken in a
trap. Some are of opinion that the world was made to give a body, in lieu of punishment,
unto the spirits, which through their fault were fallen from the puritie wherein they were
created: the first creation having been incorporeall. And that according as they have more
or less removed themselves their spirituality, so are they more or less merily and
giovally or rudely and saturnally incorporated: whence proceedeth the infinite variety of
so much matter created. But the spirit, who for his chastizement was invested with the
body of the Sunne, must of necessitie have a very rare and particular measure of
alteration. The extremities of our curious search turn to a glimmering and all to a
dazeling. As Plutarke says of the off-spring of histories, that after the manner of cards or
maps, the utmost limits of known countries are set down to be full of thicke marrish
grounds, shady forrests, desart and uncouth places. See here why the grosest and
most childish dotings are more commonly found in these which treat of highest and
fnrthest matters; even confounding and overwhelming themselves in their own curiosity
and presumption. The end and beginning of learning are equally accompted foolish.
Marke but how Plato talketh and raiseth his flight aloft in his Poeticall clouds, or cloudy
Poesies. Behold and read in him the gibbrish of the Gods. But what dreamed or doted he
on when he defined man to be a creature with two feet, and without feathers; giving them
that were disposed to mocke at him a pleasant and scopefull occasion to do it? For,
having plucked-off the feathers of a live capon, they named him the man of Plato. And by
what simplicitie did the Epicureans first imagine that the Atomes or Motes, which they
termed to be bodies, having some weight and a natural moving downeward, had framed
the world; until such time as they were advised by their adversaries that by this
description it was not possible they should join and take hold one of another; their fall
being so down-right and perpendicular, and every way engendring parallel lines? And
therefore was it necessarie they should afterward adde a causall moving sideling unto
them: And moreover to give their Atomes crooked and forked tailes, that so they might
take hold of any thing and claspe themselves. And even then those that pursue them with
this other consideration, do they not much trouble them? If Atomes have by chance
formed so many sorts of figures, why did they never meet together to frame a house or

make a shooe? Why should we not likewise believe that an infinit number of Greek
letters, confusedly scattered in some open place, might one day meet and join together to
the contexture of the Iliads? That which is capable of reason (says Zeno) is better than
that which is not. There is nothing better than the world: then the world is capable of
reason. By the same arguing Cotta maketh the world a Mathematician, and by this other
arguing of Zeno, he makes him a Musitian and an Organist. The whole is more than the
part: we are capable of wisdom, and we are part of the world: then the world is wise.
There are infinit like examples seen, not only of false, but foolish arguments, which
cannot hold, and which accuse their authors not so much of ignorance as of folly, in the
reproaches that Philosophers charge one another with, about the disagreeings in their
opinions and sects. He that should fardle-up a bundle or huddle of the fooleries of mans
wisdom, might recount wonders. I willingly assemble some (as a show or patterns) by
some means or byase, no less profitable than the most moderate instructions. Let us by
that judge what we are to esteeme of man, of his sense, and of his reason; since in these
great men, and who have raised mans sufficiencie so high, there are found so grose errors
and so apparant defects. As for me, I would rather believe that they have thus casually
treated learning even as a sporting childs baby, and have sported themselves with reason,
as of a vain and frivolous instrument, setting forth all sorts of inventions, devices, and
fantasies, sometimes more outstretched, and sometimes more loose. The same Plato, who
defineth man like unto a Capon, says elsewhere, after Socrates, that in good sooth he
knows not what man is; and that of all parts of the world there is none so hard to be
known. By this varietie of conceits and instabilitie of opinions, they, as it were, leade us
closely by the hand to this resolution of their irresolution. They make a profession not
alwayes to present their advice manifest and unmasked: they have oft concealed the same
under the fabulous shadows of Poesie, and sometimes under other vizards. For our
imperfection admitteth this also, that raw meats are not alwayes good for our stomacks:
but they must be dried, altred, and corrupted, and so do they who sometimes shadow
their simple opinions and judgements; and that they may the better sute themselves unto
common use, they many times falsifie them. They will not make open profession of
ignorance, and of the imbecility of mans reason, because they will not make children
afraid, but they manifestly declare the same unto us under the show of a troubled Science
and unconstant learning. I persuaded somebody in Italy, who laboured very much to
speak Italian, that always provided he desired but to be understood, and not to seek to
excel others therein, he should only employ and use such words as came first to his
mouth, whether they were Latine, French, Spanish, or Gascoine, and that adding the
Italian terminations unto them, he should never misse to fall upon some idiome of the
countrie, either Tuscan, Roman, Venetian, Piemontoise, or Neapolitan; and amongst so
many severall formes of speech to take hold of one. The very same I say of Philosophy.
She has so many faces and so much varietie, and has said so much, that all our dreames
and devices are found in her. The fantasie of man can conceive or imagine nothing, be it
good or evil, that is not to be found in her: Nihil tam absurde dici potest, quod non
dicatur ab aliquo Philosophorum (Cic. Div. ii.) ’Nothing may be spoken so absurdly, but
that it is spoken by some of the Philosophers.’ And therefore do I suffer my humors or

caprices more freely to pass in public; forasmuch as though they are borne with, and of
me, and without any patterne, well I wot they will be found to have relation to some
ancient humor, and some shall be found that will both know and tell whence and of
whom I have borrowed them. My customs are natural; when I contrived them, I called
not for the helpe of any discipline: and weake and faint as they were, when I have had a
desire to express them, and to make them appear to the world a little more comely and
decent, I have somewhat endevoured to aid them with discourse, and assist them with
examples, I have wondred at my self that by meere chance I have met with them,
agreeing and suitable to so many ancient examples and Philosophicall discourses. What
regiment my life was of, I never knew nor learned but after it was much worne, and spent.
A new figure: an unpremeditated philosopher and a casual. But to return unto our soul,
where Plato has seated reason in the braine; anger in the heart; lust in the liver; it is very
likely that it was rather an interpretation of the soules motions than any division or
separation he meant to make of it, as of a body into many members. And the likeliest of
their opinion is that it is alwayes a soul, which by her rationall faculty remembreth her
self, comprehendeth, judgeth, desires, and exerciseth all her other functions by diverse
instruments of the body, as the pilote ruleth and directeth his ship according to the
experience he has of it; now stretching, haling, or loosing a cable, sometimes hoysing the
mainyard, removing an oar, or stirring the rudder, causing severall effects with one only
power; and that she abideth in the braine, appeareth by this, that the hurts and accidents
which touch that part do presently offend the faculties of the soul, whence she may
without inconvenience descend and glide through other parts of the body:
----- medium non deserit unquam
Coeli Phoebus iter: radus tamen omnia lustrat: -- Claud. vi. Hon. Cons.
Pan. 411.
Never the Sunne forsakes heav’ns middle ways,
Yet with his rayes he lights all, all survayes:
As the sunne spreadeth his light, and infuseth his power from heaven, and therewith filleth
the whole world.
Cætera pars animæ per totum dissita corpus
Paret, et ad numen mentis nomenque movetur. -- Lucr. iii. 144.
Th’ other part of the soul through all the body sent
Obeyes, and moved is, by the mindes government.
Some have said that there was a general soul, like unto a great body, from which all
particular, soules were extracted, and returned thither; alwayes reconjoyning and
entermingling themselves unto that universall matter:

-----Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque tractusque maris coelumque profundum:
Hinc pecudes, armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum,
Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas,
Scilicet huc reddi deinde, ac resoluta referri
Omnia: nec morti esse locum. -- Virg. Georg. iv. Ge. 222.
For God through all the earth to pass is found,
Through all Sea currents, through the heav’n profound.
Here hence men, heards, and all wild beasts that are,
Short life in birth each to themselves do share.
All things resolved to this point restor’d
Returne, nor any place to death affoord.
Others, that they did but reconjoyne and fasten themselves to it again: others, that they
were produced by the divine substance: others, by the angels, of fire and aire: some from
the beginning of the world, and some even at the time of need: others make them to
descend from the round of the moone, and that they return to it again. The common sort
of antiquities that they are begotten from father to son, after the same manner and
production that all other natural things are; arguing so by the resemblances which are
betweene fathers and children.
Instillata patris virtus tibi, ---
Thy Fathers vertues be
Instilled into you.
Fortes creantur fortibus et bonis,
-- Hor. Car. iv. Od. iv. 29.
Of valiant Sires and good,
There comes a valiant brood,
and that from fathers we see descend unto children, not only the marks of their bodies, but
also a resemblance of humors, of complexions, and inclinations of the soul.
Denique cur acrum violentia triste Leonum
Seminum sequitur, dolus Vulpibus, et fuga Cervis
A patribus datur, et patrius pavor incitat Artus,
Si non certa suo quia semine seminioque
Vis animi pariter crescit cum corpore toto? -- Lucr. iii. 766,771.

Why followes violence the savage Lyons race?
Why craft the Foxes? Why, to Deere to flye apace?
By parents is it given, when parents fear incites,
Unless because a certain force of inward spirits
With all the body growes,
As seed and seed-spring goes?
That divine justice is grounded thereupon, punishing the fathers offences upon the
children; forasmuch as the contagion of the fathers vices is in some sort printed in
childrens soules, and that the misgovernment of their will toucheth them. Moreover, that if
the soules came from any other place, then by a natural consequence, and that out of the
body they should have been some other thing, they should have some remembrance of
their first being: considering the natural faculties which are proper unto him, to discourse,
to reason, and to remember.
------ Si in corpus nascentibits insinuatur,
Cur super anteactam ætatem meminisse nequimus,
Nec vestigia gesta-um rerum ulla tenemus. -- Lucr. iii. 692.
If our soul at our birth be in our body cast,
Why can we not remember ages over-past,
Nor any markes retaine of things done first or last?
For, to make our soules condition to be of that worth we would, they must all be
presupposed wise, even when they are in their natural simplicitie and genuine puritie. So
should they have been such, being freed from the corporall prison, as well before they
entered the same, as we hope they shall be when they shall be out of it. And it were
necessarie they should (being yet in the body) remember the said knowledge (as Plato
said) that what we learnt was but a new remembring of that which we had known before:
a thing that any man may by experience maintaine to be false and erroneous. First,
because we do not precisely remember what we are tanght, and that if memory did
meerely execute her functions she would at least suggest us with something besides our
learning. Secondly, what she knew being in her puritie, was a true understanding, knowing
things as they are by her divine intelligence: whereas here, if she be instructed, she is
made to receive lies and apprehend vice, wherein she cannot employ her memory; this
image and conception having never had place in her. To say that the corporall prison does
so suppresse her natural faculties, that they are altogether extinct in her: first, is cleane
contrary to this other beleefe, to knowledge her forces so great, and the operations which
men in this transitorie life feel of it, so wonderful, as to have thereby concluded this
divinitie, and fore-past eternitie, and the immortalitie to come:
Nam si tantopere est animi mutata potestas,

Omnis ut actarum excident retinentia rerum,
Non ut opinor ea ab letho jam longior errat. -- 695.
If of our mind the Power he so much altered,
As of things done all hold, all memory is fled,
Then (as I guesse) it is not far from being dead.
Moreover, it is here with us, and no where else, that the soules powers and effects are to
be considered; all the rest of her perfections are vain and unprofitable unto her: it is by
her present condition that all her immortalitie must be rewarded and paid, and she is only
accomptable for the life of man: it were injustice to have abridged her of her means and
faculties, and to have disarmed her against the time of her captivitie and prison, for her
weaknesse and sicknesse, of the time and season where she had been forced and
compelled to draw the judgement and condemnation of infinite and endlesse continuance,
and to relye upon the consideration of so short a time, which is perhaps of one or two
hours, or, if the worst happen, of an age (which have no more proportion with infinitie
than a moment) definitively to appoint and establish of all her being by that instant of
space. It were an impious disproportion to wrest an eternall reward in consequence of so
short a life. Plato, to save himself from this inconvenience, would have future payments
limited to a hundred years continuance, relatively unto a humane continuance: and many
of ours have given them temporall limits. By this they judged that her generation followed
the common condition of humane things: as also her life, by the opinion of Epicurus and
Democritus, which has most been received; following these goodly apparences. That her
birth was seen when the body was capable of her; her virtue and strength was perceived
as the corporall encreased; in her infancie might her weaknesse be discerned, and in time
her vigor and ripenesse, then her decay and age, and in the end her decrepitude.
------ gigni pariter cum corpore, et una
Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescere mentem. -- Ibid. 450.
The mind is with the body bred, we do behold,
It jointly growes with it, with it it waxeth old.
They perceived her to be capable of diverse passions, and agitated by many languishing
and painfull motions, wherethrough she fell into wearinesse and grief, capable of
alteration and change of joy, stupefaction, and languishment, subject to her infirmities,
diseases, and offences, even as the stomacke or the foot;
-----mentem sanari, corpus ut ægrum
Cernimus, et flecti medicine posse videmus: -- Ibid. 517.
We see as bodies sicke are cur’d, so is the mind,

We see, how Physicke can it each way turn and winde,
dazled and troubled by the force of wine; removed from her seat by the vapors of a
burning feaver; drowzie and sleepy by the application of some medicaments, and rouzed
up again by the virtue of some others.
-----corpoream naturam animi esse necesse est,
Corporeis quoniam telis ictuque laborat. -- Ibid. 176.
The nature of the mind must ne eds corporeall be,
For with corporeall darts and strokes it’s griev’d we see.
She was seen to dismay and confound all her faculties by the only biting of a sicke
dog, and to containe no great constancy of discourse, no sufficiencie, no virtue, no
philosophicall resolution, no contention of her forces that might exempt her from the
subjection of these accidents: the spittle or slavering of a mastive dog shed upon Socrates
his hands, to trouble all his wisdom, to distemper his great and regular imagination, and
so to vanquish and annull them that no signe or show of his former knowledge was left in
him:
------ vis animai
Conturbatur,
----et divisa seorsum
Disjectatur eodem illo distracta veneno. -- Ibid. 501.
The soules force is disturbed, separated,
Distraught by that same poison, alienated.
And the said venome to find no more resistance in his soul than in that of a child of
foure years old, a venome able to make all Philosophy (were she incarnate) become
furious and mad: so that Cato, who scorned both death and fortune, could not abide the
sight of a looking glasse or of water; overcome with horrour, and quelled with
amazement, if by the contagion of a mad dog he had fallen into that sicknesse which
physicians call hydrophobia, or fear of waters.
------ vis morbi distracta per artus
Turbat agens animam, spumantes æquore salso
Ventorum ut validis fervescunt viribus undæ. -- Ibid. 495.
The force of the disease disperst through joints offends,
Driving the soul, as in salt Seas the wave ascends,
Foming by furious force which the wind raging lends.

Now, concerning this point. Philosophy has indeed armed man for the endurng’ of all
other accidents, whether with patience, or if it be overcostly to be found, with an infallible
defeat in conveying herself altogether from the sense: but they are means which serve a
soul that is her own, and in her proper force capable of discourse and deliberation: not
serving to this inconvenience wherewith a Philosopher, a soul becomes the soul of a
foole, troubled, vanquished and lost. Which diverse occasions may produce, as in an over-
violent agitation, which by some vehement passion the soul may beget in herself: or a
hurt in some part of the body, or an exhalation from the stomacke, casting as into some
astonishment, dazling, or giddinesse of the head:
-----morbis in corporis avius errat
Sæpe animus, dementit enim, deliraque fatur,
Interdumque gravi Lethargo fertur in altum
Æternumque soporem, oculis nutuque cadenti. Ibid. 467.
The mind in bodies sicknesse often wandring strayes;
For it enraged rave s, and idle talk outbrayes;
Brought by sharpe Lethargy sometime to more than deepe,
While eyes and eye-lids fall into eternall sleepe.
Philosophers have, in mine opinion, but slightly harpt upon this string, no more than
other of like consequence. They have ever this Dilemma in their mouth to comfort our
mortal condition: ’The soul is either mortal or immortall: if mortal, she shall be
without pain: if immortall, she shall mend.’ They never touch the other branch: what if
she empaire and be worse? and leave the menaces of future paines to Poets. But thereby
they deal themselves a good game. These are two omissions which in their discourses do
often offer themselves unto me. I come to the first again: the soul loses the use of that
Stoicall chief felicitie, so constant and so firme. Our goodly wisdom must necessarily in
this place yielde herself and quit her weapons. As for other matters, they also considered
by the vanity of mans reason, that the admixture and societie of two so different parts as
is the mortal and the immortall is unimaginable:
Quippe etenim mortale æterno jungere, et una
Consentire putare, et fungi mutua posse,
Desipere est. Quid enim diversius esse putandum est,
Aut magis inter se disjuncture discrepitansque,
Quam mortale quod est, immortali atque perenni
Iunctum in concilio sævas tolerare procellas? --Ibid. 831.
For what immortall is, mortal to join unto,
And think they can agree, and mutual duties do,
Is to be foolish: for what think we stranger is,

More disagreenble or more disjoyn’d than this,
That mortal with immortall endlesse joyn’d in union,
Can most outrageous stormes endure in their communion?
Moreover they felt their soul to be engaged in death as well as the body.
----- simul ævo fessa fatiscit, -- Ibid. 463.
It faints in one,
Wearied as age is gone.
Which thing (according to Zeno) the image of sleep does manifestly show unto us. For he
esteemeth that it is a fainting and declination of the soul as well as of the body: Contrahi
animum, et quasi labi putat atque decidere: (Cic. Div. ii.) ’He thinks the mind is
contracted, and does as it were slide and fall down.’ And that (which is perceived in
some) its force and vigor maintaineth itself even in the end of life, they referred and
imputed the same to the diversitie of diseases, as men are seen in that extremity to
maintaine some one sense and some another, some their hearing and some their smelling,
without any alteration; and there is no weaknesse or decay seen so universall but some
entire and vigorous parts will remaine.
Non alio pacto quam sipes cum dolet ægri,
In nullo caput interea sit forte dolore. -- Lucr. iii. 111.
No otherwise than if, when sick-mans foote does ake,
Meane time perhaps his head no fellow-feeling take.
Our judgements sight referreth itself unto truth, as does the owles eyes unto the
shining of the sunne, as says Aristotle. How should we better convince him than by so
grosse blindnesse in so apparent a light? For the contrary opinion of the soules
immortalitie, which Cicero says to have first been brought in ( at least by the testimony
of books) by Pherecydes Syrius in the time of King Tullus (others ascribe the invention
thereof to Thales, and other to others) it is the part of humane knowledge treated most
sparingly and with more doubt. The most constant Dogmatists (namely in this point) are
enforced to cast themselves under the shelter of the Academikes wings. No man knowes
what Aristotle has established upon this subject no more than all the ancients in general,
who handle the same with a very wavering beliefe: Rem gratissimam promittentium magis
quam probantium: ’Who rather promise than approve a thing most acceptable.’ He has
hidden himself under the clouds of intricat and ambiguous words and unintelligible
senses, and has left his Sectaries as much cause to dispute upon his judgement as upon
the matter. Two things made this his opinion plausible to them: the one, that without the
immortality of soules there should no means be left to ground or settle the vain hopes of

glory; a consideration of wonderful credit in the world: the other (as Plato says) that it is
a most profitable impression, that vices, when they steal away from out the sight and
knowledge of humane justice, remaine ever as a blancke before divine justice, which even
after the death of the guilty will severely pursue them. Man is ever possessed with an
extreme desire to prolong his being, and has to the uttermost of his skill provided for it.
Toombs and Monuments are for the preservation of his body, and glory for the
continuance of his name. He has employed all his wit to frame him self anew (as
impatient of his fortune) and to underprop or uphold himself by his inventions. The soul
by reason of her trouble and imbecility, as unable to subsist of herself, is ever and in all
places questing and searching comforts, hopes, foundations and forraine circumstances, on
which she may take hold and settle herself. And how light and fantastic soever his
invention does frame them unto him, he notwithstanding relieth more surely upon them
and more willingly than upon himself: But it is a wonder to see how the most obstinat in
this so just and manifest persuasion of our spirits immortalitie have found themselves
short and unable to establish the same by their humane forces. Somnia sunt non docentis
sed optantis: ’These are dreames not of one that teacheth, but wisheth what he would
have:’ said an ancient Writer. Man may by his own testimony know that the truth he
alone discovereth, the same he oweth unto fortune and chance, since even when she is
falne into his hands, he wanteth wherwith to lay hold on her and keep her; and that this
reason has not the power to prevaile with it. All things produced by our own discourse
and sufficiencie, as well true as false, are subject to uncertaintie and disputation. It is for
the punishment of our temeritie and instruction of our misery and incapacitie, that God
caused the trouble, downefall and confusion of Babels Tower. Whatsoever we attempt
without his assistance, whatever we see without the lampe of his grace, is but vanity and
folly: With our weaknes we corrupt and adulterate the very essence of truth (which is
uniform and constant when fortune gives us the possession of it. What course soever
man taketh of himself, it is Gods permission that he ever commeth to that confusion
whose image he so lively representeth unto us by the just punishment, wherewith he
framed the presumptuous overweening of Nembroth, and brought to nothing the frivolous
enterprises of the building of his high-towring Pyramis or Heaven-menacing tower.
Perdam sapientiam sapientium et prudentiam prudentium reprobabo: (1 Cor. i. 19.) ’I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and reprove the providence of them that are most
prudent.’ The diversitie of tongues and languages wherewith he disturbed that work and
overthrew that proudly-raisd Pile; what else is it but this infinit altercation and perpetual
discordance of opinions and reasons which accompanieth and entangleth the frivolous
frame of mans learning, or vain building of human science? Which he does most
profitably. Who might containe us, had we but one graine of knowledge? This Saint has
done me much pleasure: Ipsa Veritatis occultatio, aut humilitatis exercitatio est, out
elationis attritio: ’The very concealing of the profit is either an exercise of humility or a
beating down of arrogancie.’ Unto what point of presumption and insolencie do we not
carry our blindnesse and foolishnesse? But to return to my purpose: Verily there was
great reason that we should be beholding to God alone, and to the benefit of his grace, for
the truth of so noble a beliefe, since from his liberalitie alone we receive the fruit of

immortalitie, which consisteth in enjoying of eternall blessednesse. Let us ingenuously
confesse that only God and Faith has told it us: for it is no lesson of Nature, nor coming
from our reason. And he that shall both within and without narrowly sift and curiously
sound his being and his forces without this divine privilege, he that shall view and
consider man without flattering him, shall nor find nor see either efficacie or facultie in
him that tasteth of any other thing but death and earth. The more we give, the more we
owe: and the more we yield unto God, the more Christian-like do we. That which the
Stoike Philosopher said he held by the casual consent of the peoples voice, had it not
been better he had held it of God? Cum de animorum æternitate disserimus, non leue
momentum apud nos habet Consensus hominum, aut timentium inferos aut colentium. Vtor
hac publica persuasione: (Sen. Epist. 117.) ’When we discourse of the immortalitie of
soules, in my conceit the consent of those men is of no small authority, who either fear
or adore the infernall powers. This public persuasion I make use of.’ Now the weaknes of
human arguments on this subject is very manifestly known by the fabulous
circumstances they have added unto the traine of this opinion, to find out what condition
this our immortalitie was of. Let us omit the Stoices. Usuram nobis largiuntur, tanquam
cornicibus: diu mansuros aiunt animos, semper, negant. (Cic. Tusc. Qu. i.) ’They grant us
use of life, as is unto Ravens: they say our soules shall long continue, but they deny they
shall last ever.’ Who gives unto soules a life beyond this but finite. The most universall
and received fantasie, and which endureth to this day, has been that whereof Pythagoras
is made Author, not that he was the first inventor of it, but because it received much force
and credit by the authority of his approbation; which is, that soules, at their departure
from us did but pass and roule from one to another body, from a Lyon to a Horse, from a
Horse to a King, uncessantly wandring up and down from House to Mansion. And
himself said that he remembred to have been Æthalides, then Euphorbus, afterward
Hermotimus, at last from Pyrrhus to have passed into Pythagoras; having memory of
himself the space of two hundred and six years: some added more, that the same soules
do sometimes ascend up to heaven and come down again:
O Pater anne aliquas ad coelum hinc ire putandum est
Sublimes animas, interumque ad tarda reverti
Corpora? Quæ lucis miseris tam dira cupido? Virg. Æn. vi. 739.
Must we think (Father) some soules hence do go,
Raised to heav’n, thence turn to bodies slow?
Whence does so dyre desire of light on wretches grow?
Origen makes them eternally to go and come from a good to a bad estate. The opinion
that Varro reporteth is, that in the revolution of foure hundred and forty years they
reconjoyned themselves unto their first bodies. Chrysippus, that that must come to pass
after a certain space of time unknown and not limited. Plato (who says that he holds
this opinion from Pindarus and from ancient Poesie) of infinite vicissitudes of alteration
to which the soul is prepared, having no wearines nor rewards in the other world but

temporall, as her life in this is but temporall, concludeth in her a singular knowledge of
the affairs of Heaven, of Hell, and here below, where she has passed, repassed, and
sojourned in many voyages, a matter in his remembrance. Beholde her progresse
elsewhere: he that has lived well reconjoyneth himself unto that Star or Planet to which
he is assigned: who evil, passeth into a woman: and if then he amend not himself, he
trans-changeth himself into a beast of condition agreeing to his vicious customs, and
shall never see an end of his punishments until he return to his natural condition, and by
virtue of reason he have deprived himself of those grose, stupide, and elementarie
qualities that were in him. But I will not forget the objection which the Epicureans make
unto this transmigration from one body to another: which is very pleasant. They demand
what order there should be if the throng of the dying should be greater than that of such as
be borne. For the soules removed from their abode would throng and strive together who
should get the best seat in this new case: and demand besides what they would pass their
time about, whilst they should stay until any other mansion were made ready for them: Or
contrary-wise, if more creatures were borne than should dye, they say bodies shall be in an
ill taking, expecting the infusion of their soul, and it would come to pass that some of
them should dye before they had ever been living.
Denique connubia ad veneris, partusque ferarunt,
Esse animas præsto deridiculum esse videtur,
Et spectare immortales mortalia membra
Innumero numero, certareque præpro peranter
Inter se, quæ prima potissimaque insinuetur. - Lucr. iii. 802.
Lastly, ridiculous it is, soules should be prest
To Venus meetings, and begetting of a beast:
That they to mortal lims immortall be addrest
In number numberlesse, and over-hasty strive,
Which of them first and chief should get in there to live.
Others have stayed the soul in the deceased bodies, therewith to animate serpents, wormes,
and other beasts, which are said to engender from the corruption of our members, indeed, and
from our ashes: others divide it in two parts, one mortal, another immortall: others make
it corporeall, and yet notwithstanding immortall: others make it immortall, without any
science or knowledge. Nay, there are some of ours who have deemed that of condemned
mens souls divels were made: as Plutarke thinks, that Gods are made of those soules
which are saved: for there be few things that this author does more resolutely averre then
this; holding every where else an ambiguous and doubtfull kind of speech. It is to be
imagined and firmlie believed (says he) that the soules of men, vertuous both according
unto nature and divine justice, become of Men, Saints, and of Saints, Demi-Gods, and
after they are once perfectly, as in sacrifices of purgation, cleansed and purified being
delivered from all possibility and mortalitie, become, of Demi-Gods (not by any civill
ordinance, but in good truth, and according to manifest reason) perfect and very very

Gods; receiving a most blessed and thrice glorious end. But whosoever shall see him who
is notwithstanding one of the most sparing and moderate of that faction, so undantedly to
skirmish, and will bear him relate his wonders upon this subject, him I refer to his
discourse of the Moone, and of Socrates his Dæmon; where as evidently as in any other
place, may be averred that the mysteries of Philosophy have many strange conceits,
common with those of Poesie; mans understanding losing itself once goes about to
sound and controule all things to the utmost ende; as, tired and troubled by a long and
wearisome course of our life, we return to a kind of doting childhood. Note here the
goodly and certain instructions which concerning our soules-subject we drawe from
humane knowledge. There is no less rashnesse in that which she teacheth us touching
our corporall parts. Let us make choyce but of one or two examples, else should we lose
ourselves in this troublesome and vaste Ocean of Physicall errours. Let us know whether
they agree but in this one, that is to say, of what matter men are derived and produced one
from another. For, touching their first production, it is no marvell if in a thing so high and
so ancient mans wit is troubled and confounded. Archelaus, the Physitian, to whom (as
Aristoxenus affirmeth) Socrates was disciple and Minion, assevered that both men and
beasts had been made of milkie slime or mudde, expressed by the heate of the earth.
Pythagoras says that our seed is the scumme or froth of our best blood: Plato, the
distilling of the marrow in the back-bone, which he argueth thus because that place feeleth
first the wearinesse which followeth the generative business.
Alcmæon, a part of the braine substance, which to prove he says their eyes are ever
most troubled that over-intemperately addict themselves to that exercise. Democritus, a
substance extracted from all parts of this corporall Masse. Epicurus, extracted from the
last soul and the body. Aristotle, an excrement drawne from the nourishment of the
blood, the last scattereth itself in our severall members; others, blood, concocted and
digested by the heate of the genitories, which they judge because in the extreme, earnest,
and forced labours, many shed drops of pure blood; wherein some appearance seems to
be, if from so infinit a confusion a ny likelihood may be drawne. But to bring this seed to
effect, how many contrary opinions make they of it? Aristotle and Democritus hold that
women have no sperme, that it is but a sweate, which by reason of the pleasure and
frication they cast forth, and availeth nothing in generation.
Galen and his adherents contrariwise, affirme that there can be no generation except
two seeds meete together. Behold the Physitians, the Philosophers, the Lawyers, and the
Divines pell-mell together by the ears with our women about the question and disputation
how long women bear their fruite in their wombe. And as for me, by my own
example, I take their part that maintaine a woman may go eleven months with child. The
worlde is framed of this experience, there is no meane woman so simple that cannot give
her censure upon all these contestations, although we could not agree. This is sufficient to
verifie that in the corporall part man is no more instructed of himself than in the
spirituall. We have proposed himself to himself, and his reason to reason, to see what
she shall tell us of it. Mee thinkes I have sufficiently declared how little understanding
she has of herself. And he who has no understanding of himself, what can he have
understanding of? Quasi vero mensuram ullius rei possit agere qui sui nesciat: (Plin. Nat.

Hist. ii. cap. 1.) ’As though he could take measure of any thing that knowes not his own
measure.’ Truely Protagoras told us prettie tales, when he makes a man the measure of
all things, who never knew so much as his own. If it be not he, his dignitie will never
suffer any other creature to have this advantage over him. Now he being so contrary in
himself, and one judgement so uncessantly subverting another, this favorable proposition
was but a jest, which induced us necessarily to conclude the nullity of the Compasse and
the Compasser. When Thales judgeth the knowledge of man very hard unto man, he
teacheth him the knowledge of all other things to be impossible unto him. You for whom I
have taken the paines to enlarge so long a work (against my custom) will not shun to
maintaine your Sebond with the ordinary form of arguing, whereof you are daily
instructed, and will therein exercise both your mind and study; for this last trick of sense
must not be employed but as an extreme remedy. It is a desperate thrust, gainst which you
must forsake your weapons, to force your adversary to renounce his, and a secret slight,
which must seldom and very sparingly be put in practice. It is a great foolish hardnesse to
lose our self for the loss of another. A man must not be willing to die to revenge
himself, as Gobrias was: who being close by the ears with a Lord of Persia, Darius
chanced to come in with his sword in his hand, and fearing to strike for fear he should
hurt Gobrias, he called unto him, and bade him smite boldly, although he should smite
through both. I have heard arms and conditions of single combates being desperate, and
in which he that offered them put not himself and his enemy in danger of an end
inevitable to both, reproved as unjust, and condemned as unlawfull. The Portugals took
once certain Turkes prisoners in the Indian Seas, who, impatient of their capacity,
resolved with themselves (and their resolution succeeded) by rubbing of Ship-nailes one
against another, and causing sparkes of fire to fall amongst the barrels of powder (which
lay not far from them) with intent to consume both themselves, their masters, and the ship.
We but touch at the skirts, and glance at the last closings of the Sciences, wherein
extremity, as well as in virtue, is vicious. Keepe yourselves in the common path, it is not
good to be so subtil and so curious. Remember what the Italian proverbe says,
Chi troppo s’ assottiglia, si scavezza. -- Petr. p. i. canz. xiii. 48.
Who makes himself too fine,
Does break himself in fine.
I persuade you, in your opinions and discourses, as much as in your customs, and in
every other thing to use moderation and temperance, and avoide all newfangled
inventions and strangenesse. All extravagant waies displease me. You, who by the
authority and preheminence which your greatness has laied upon you, and more by the
advantages which the qualities that are most your own, bestow on you, may with a nod
command whom you please, should have laied this charge upon some one that had made
profession of learning, who might otherwise have disposed and enriched this fantasie.
Notwithstanding here you have enough to supply your wants of it. Epicurus said of the
laws that the worst were so necessary unto us, that without them men would enterdevour

one another. And Plato verifieth that without laws we should live like beasts. Our spirit is
a vagabond, a d angerous and foolhardy implement; it is very harde to join order and
measure to it. In my time, such as have any rare excellency above others, or extraordinary
vivacity, we see them almost all so lavish and unbridled in licence of opinions and
manners, as it may be counted a wonder to find any one settled and sociable. There is
great reason why the spirit of man should be so strictly embarred. In his study, as in all
things else, he must have his steps numbered and ordered. The limits of his pursuite must
be cut out by art. He is bridled and fettered with and by religions, laws, customs,
knowledge, precepts, paines, and recompences, both mortal and immortall; yet we see
him, by means of his volubility and dissolution, escape all these bonds. It is a vain body
that has no way about him to be seized on or cut off: a diverse and deformed body, on
which neither knot nor hold may be fastened. Verily there are few soules so orderly, so
constante and so well borne as may be trusted with their own conduct, and may not with
moderation, and without rashnes, faile in the liberty of their judgements beyond common
opinions. It is more expedient to give some body the charge and tuition of them. The spirit
is an outrageous glaive, indeed even to his own possessor, except he have the grace very
orderly and discreetly to arm himself therewith. And there is no beast to whom one may
more justly apply a blinding bord, to keep her sight in and force her to her footing, and
keep from straying here and there, without the tracke which use and laws trace her out.
Therefore shall it be better for you to close and bound yourselves in the accustomed path,
however it be, than to take your flight to this unbridled licence. But if any one of these
new doctors shall undertake to play the wise or ingenious before you, at the charge of his
and your health: to rid you out of this dangerous plague, which daily more and more
spreds itself in your Courts this preservative will in any extreme necessity, be a let, that
the contagion of this venome shall neither offend you nor your assistance. The liberty
then, and the jollity of their ancient spirits brought forth many different Sects of opinions,
in Philosophy and humane Sciences: every one undertaking to judge and chuse, so he
might raise a faction. But now that men walke all one way: Qui certis quibusdam
destinatisque sententiis addicti et consecrate sunt, ut etiam quæ non pr obant, cogantur
defendere: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. ii.) ’Who are addicted and consecrated to certain set and fore-
decreed opinions, so as they are enforced to maintaine those things which they prove or
approve not:’ And that we receive Arts by civill authority and appointment: so that
Schooles have but one patterne, likewise circumscribed discipline and institution; no man
regardeth more what coines weigh and are worth; but every man in his turn receiveth
them according to the value that common approbation and succession allotteth them: Men
dispute no longer of the alloy, but of the use. So are all things spent and vented like.
Physike is received as Geometry: and jugling tricks, enchantments, bonds, the commerce
of deceased spirits, prognostications, domifications, indeed even this ridiculous wit and
wealth-consuming pursuite of the Philosophers stone, all is emploied and uttered without
contradiction. It sufficeth to know that Mars his place lodgeth in the middle of the hands
triangle; that of Venus in the thumme; and Mercuries in the little finger: and when the
table-line cutteth the fore-finger’s rising, it is a signe of cruelty: when it falleth under the
middle finger, and that the natural median-line makes an angle with the vital, under the

same side, it is a signe of a miserable death: and when a womans natural line is open, and
closes not its angle with the vital, it evidenty denotes that she will not be very chast. I call
your self to witness, if with this Science only, a man may not pass with reputation and
favor among all companies. Theophrastus was wont to say that mans knowledge,
directed by the sense, might judge of the causes of things unto a certain measure, but
being come to the extream and first causes, it must necessarily stay, and be blunted or
abated, either by reason of its weaknesse or of the things difficulty. It is an indifferent and
pleasing kind of opinion to think that our sufficiency may bring us to the knowledge of
some things, and has certain measures of power beyond which it’s temerity to employ it.
This opinion is plausible and brought in by way of composition: but it is hard to give our
spirit any limits, being very curious and greedy, and not tied to stay rather at a thousand
then at fifty spaces. Having found by experience that if one had mist to attaine unto some
one thing, another has come unto it, and that which one age never knew, the age
succeeding has found out: and that Sciences and Arts are not cast in a mold, but rather by
little and little formed and shaped by often handling and polishing them over: even as
bears fashion their yong whelps by often licking them: what my strength cannot discover,
I cease not to sound and try: and in handling and kneading this new matter, and with
removing and chasing it, I open some faculty for him that shall follow me, that with more
ease he may enjoy the same, and make it more facile, more supple and more pliable:
-----vt hymettia sole
Cera remollescit, tractataque pollice, multas
Vertitur in facies, ipsoque fit vtilis vsu. -- Ovid. Metam. x. 284.
As the best Bees wax melteth by the Sun,
And handling, into many formes does run,
And is made aptly fit
For use by using it.
As much will the second do for the third, which is a cause that difficulty does not make
me despaire, much less my unability: for it is but my own. Man is as well capable of
all things as of some. And if (as Theophrastus says) he avow the ignorance of the first
causes and beginnings, let him boldly quit all the rest of his knowledge. If his foundation
faile him, his discourse is overthrowne. The dispute has no other scope, and to enquire
no other end but the principles: If this end stay not his course, he casteth himself into an
infinite irresolution. Non potest aliud alio magis minusque comprehendi, quoiam omnium
reram vna est definitio comprehendendi: ’One thing can neither more nor less be
comprehended than another, since of all things there is one definition of comprehending.’
Now it is likely that if the soul knew any thing, she first know herself: and if she knew
any without and besides herself, it must be her veil and body before any thing else. If
even at this day the Gods of Physicke are seen to wrangle about our Anatomie,
Mulciber in Troiam, pro Troia stabat Apollo, -- Ovid. Trist. El. ii. 5.

Apollo stood for Troy,
Vulcan Troy to destroy,
when shall we expect that they will be agreed? We are nearer unto ourselves, then is
whiteness unto snow or weight unto a stone. If man know not himself, how can he
know his functions and forces? It is not by fortune that some true notice does not lodge
with us but by hazard. And forasmuch as by the same way, fashion and conduct, errours
are received into our soul, she has not wherewithall to distinguish them, nor whereby to
chose the truth from falshood. The Academikes received some inclination of judgment
and found it over raw, to say, it was no more likely snow should be white then blacke, and
that we should be no more assured of the moving of a stone, which goeth from our hand,
then of that of the eighth Spheare. And to avoid this difficultie and strangenesse, which in
truth cannot but hardly lodge in our imagination, howbeit they establish that we were no
way capable of knowledge, and that truth is engulfed in the deepest Abysses, where mans
sight can no way enter; yet avowed they some things to be more likely and possible then
others, and receivd this faculty in their judgement that they might rather incline to one
apparence then to another. They allowed her this propension, interdicting her all
resolution. The Pyrrhonians advise is more hardy, and therewithall more likely. For this
Academicall inclination, and this propension rather to one then another proposition, what
else is it then a recognition of some more apparant truth, in this than in that? If our
understanding be capable of the form, of the lineaments, of the behaviour and face of
truth, it might as well see it all compleat, as but halfe, growing and imperfect. For this
apparance of verisimilitude which makes them rather take the left then the right hand, do
you augment it; this one ounce of likelihood, which turnes the balance, do you multiply
it by a hundred, nay by a thousand ounces; it wil in the end come to pass that the balance
will absolutely resolve and conclude one choice and perfect truth. But how do they suffer
themselves to be made tractable by likelihood, if they know not truth? How know they the
semblance of that whereof they understand not the essence? Either we are able to judge
absolutely, or absolutely we cannot. If our intellectuall and sensible faculties are without
ground or footing, if they but hull up and down and drive with the wind, for nothing
suffer we our judgment to be carried away to any part of their operation, what apparauce
soever it seems to present us with. And the surest and most happy situation of our
understanding should be that, where without any tottering or agitation it might maintaine
itself setled, upright and inflexible. Inter visa, vera, aut falsa, ad animi assensum, nihil
interest: (Cic. Acad. Qu. iv.) ’There is no difference betwixt true and false visions
concerning the mindes assent.’ That things lodge not in us in their proper form and
essence, and make not their entrance into us of their own power and authority, we see it
most evidently. For if it were so, we would receive them all likewise: wine should be such in
a sicke mans mouth as in a healthy mans. He whose fingers are chopt through cold, and
stiffe or benumbed with frost, should find the same ha rdnesse in the wood or iron he
might handle, which another does. Then strange subjects yield unto our mercy, and lodge
with us according to our pleasure. Now if on our part we receive any thing without

alteration, if mans holdfasts were capable and sufficiently powerfull by our proper means
to seize on truth, those means being common to all; this truth would successively remove
itself from one to another. And of so many things as are in the world, at least one should
be found, that by an universall consent should be beleeved of all. But that no proposition
is seen, which is not controversied and debated amongst us, or that may not be, declareth
plainly that our judgment does not absolutely and clearly seize on that which it seizeth: for
my judgment cannot make my fellowes judgment to receive the same: which is a signe
that I have seized upon it by some other meane then by a natural power in me or other
men. Leave we apart this infinite confusion of opinions, which is seen amonge
Philosophers themselves, and this universal and perpetuall disputation, in and concerning
the knowledge of things. For it is most truly presupposed that men (I mean the wisest, the
best borne, indeed the most sufficient do never agree; no not so much that heaven is over
our heads. For they who doubt of all, do also doubt of this: and such as affirme that we
cannot conceive any thing, say we have not conceived whether heaven be over our heads;
which two opinions are in number (without any comp arison) the most forcible. Besides
this diversity and infinite division, by reason of the trouble which our own judgement
layeth upon ourselves, and the uncertainty which every man findes in himself, it may
manifestly be perceived that this situation is very uncertaine and unstaid. How diversely
judge we of things? How often change we our phantasies? What I hold and believe this
day I believe and hold with all my beleefe: all my implements, springs and motions,
embrace and claspe this opinion , and to the utmost of their power warrant the same: I
could not possibly embrace any verity, nor with more assurance keep it, than I do this. I
am wholy and absolutely given to it: but has it not been my fortune, not once, but a
hundred, nay a thousand times, nay daily, to have embraced some other thing with the
very same instruments and condition which upon better advise I have afterward judged
false? A man should, at the least become wise at his own cost, and learne by others
harmes. If under this colour I have often found my self deceived, if my Touch-stone be
commonly found false and my balance un-even and unjust; what assurance may I more
take of it at this time than at others? Is it not folly in me to suffer my self so often to be
beguiled and couzened by one guide? Nevertheless, let fortune remove us five hundred
times from our place, let her do nothing but incessantly empty and fill, as in a vessell,
other and other opinions in our mind, the present and last is alwaies supposed certain and
infallible. For this must a man have goods, honor, life, state, health and all:
-----posterior res illa reperta
Perdit; et immutat sensus ad pristina quæque. -- Lucr. v. 1424.
The latter thing destroies all found before;
And alters sense at all things lik’d of yore.
Whatsoever is told us, and what ever we learne, we should ever remember: it is man that
delivereth and man that receiveth: it is a mortal hand that presents it, and a mortal hand
that receives it. Only things which come to us from heaven have right and authority of

persuasion and markes of truth: which we neither see with our eyes nor receive by our
means: this sacred and great image would be of no force in so wretched a Mansion
except God prepare it to that use and purpose, unless God by his particular grace and
supernaturall favor reforme and strengthen the same. Our fraile and defective condition
ought at least make us demeane ourselves more moderately and more circumspectly in
our changes. We should remember that whatsoever we receive in our understanding we
often receive false things, and that it is by the same instruments which many times
contradict and deceive themselves. And no marvell if they contradict themselves, being so
easy to encline, and upon very slight occasions subject to waver and turn. Certain it is
that our apprehension, our judgement, and our soules faculties in general, do suffer
according to the bodies motions and alterations, which are continuall. Have we not our
spirits more vigilant, our memory more ready, and our discourses more lively in time of
health then in sicknesse? Does not joy and blithenesse make us receive the subjects that
present themselves unto our soul, with another kind of countenance, then lowring
vexation and drooping melancholy does? Doe you imagine that Catullus or Saphoes
verses delight and please an old covetous chuff-penny wretch as they do a lusty and
vigorous yong man? Cleomenes the son of Anaxandridas being sick, his friends
reproved him, saying he had new strange humors and unusuall phantasies: ’It is not
unlikely,’ answered he, ’for I am not the man I was wont to be in the time of health; but
being other, so are my fantasies and my humors.’ In the rabble case-canvasing of our plea-
courts this byword, Gaudeat de bona fortuna: ’Let him joy in his good fortune" is much in
use, and is spoken of criminall offenders, who happen to meete with Judges in some mild
temper or well-pleased mood. For it is most certain that in times of condemnation the
Judges doom or sentence is sometimes perceived to be more sharpen mercilesse and
forward, and at other times more tractable, facile, and enclined to shadow or excuse an
offence, according as he is well or ill pleased in mind. A man that commeth out of his
house troubled with the pain of the goute, vexed with jealousy, or angry that his servant
has robbed him, and whose mind is overcome with grief, and plunged with vexation,
and distracted with anger, there is not question to be made but his judgement is at that
instant distempred, and much transported that way. That venerable senate of the
Areopagites was wont to judge and sentence by night, for fear the sight of the suters
might corrupt justice. The air itself, and the clearenes of the firmament, does forbode
us some change and alteration of weather, as says that Greek verse in Cicero:
Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali pater ipse
Jupiter auctifera lustravit lampade terras. -- Cic. ex incert.
Such are mens mindes, as with increasefull light
Our father Jove survaies the world in sight.
It is not only fevers, drinkes and great accidents, that over- whelme our judgement: the
least things in the world will turn it topsie-turvie. And although we feel it not, it is not to
be doubted, if a continuall ague may in the end suppresse our mind, a tertian will also

(according to her measure and proportion) breed some alteration in it. If an Apoplexie
does altogether stupifie and extinguish the sight of our understanding, it is not to be
doubted but a cold and rheum will likewise dazle the same. And by consequence, hardly
shall a man in all his life find one hour wherein our judgement may alwaies be found in
his right byase, our body being subject to so many continuall alterations, and stuft with so
diverse sorts of ginnes and motions, that, giving credit to Physitians, it is very hard to find
one in perfect plight, and that does not alwaies mistake his marke and shute wide. As for
the rest, this disease is not so easily discovered, except it be altogether extreme and
remedilesse; forasmuch as reason marcheth ever crooked, halting and broken-hipt; and
with falshood as with truth; and therefore it is very hard to discover her mistaking and
disorder. I alwaies call reason that apparance or show of discourses which every man
deviseth or forgeth in himself: that reason, of whose condition there may be a hundred,
one contrary to another, about one self same subject: it is an instrument of lead and wax,
stretching, pliable, and that may be fitted to all byases and squared to all measures: there
remaines nothing but the skill and sufficiency to know how to turn and winde the same.
How well soever a Judge meaneth, and what good mind so ever he beareth, if diligent care
be not given unto him (to which few ammuse themselves) his inclination unto friendship,
unto kindred, unto beauty, and unto revenge, and not only matters of so weighty
consequence, but this innated and casual instinct which us to favor one thing more than
another, and encline to one man more than to another, and which, without any leave or
reason, gives us the choice in two like subjects, or some shadow of like vanity, may
insensibly insinuate in his judgment the commendation and applause, or disfavour and
disallowance of a cause, and give the balance a twitch. I that nearest prie into my self,
and who have mine eyes uncessantly fixt upon me as one that has not much else to do
else where,
-- quis sub Arcto
Rex gelidæ metuatur oræ,
Quid Tyridatem terreat unice
Securus, -- Hor. i. Od. xxvi. 3.
Only secure, who in cold coast
Under the North-pole rules the rost,
And there is fear or what would fright,
And Tyridates put to flight,
dare very hardly report the vanity and weaknesse I feel in myself. My foot is so
staggering and unstable and I find it so ready to trip and so easy to stumble and my sight
is so dimme and uncertaine that fasting I find my self other than full fed. If my health
applaud me, or but the calmenesse of one fair day smile upon me, then am I a lusty
gallant; but if a corne wring my toe, then am I pouting, unpleasant and hard to be pleased.
One same pace of a horse is sometimes hard and sometimes easy unto me; and one same
way, one time short, another time long and wearisome; and one same form, now more,

now less agreeable and pleasing to me: sometimes I am apt to do any thing, and other
times fit to do nothing: what now is pleasing to me within a while after will be paineful.
There are a thousand indiscreet and casual agitations in me. Either a melancholy humor
possesseth me, or a cholericke passion swaieth me, which having shaken off, sometimes
frowardilesse and peevishnesse has predominancy, and other times gladnes and
blithnesse overrule me. If I chance to take a book in hand I shall in some passages
perceive some excellent graces, and which ever wound me to the soul with delight; but
let me lay it by and read him another time; let me turn and tosse him as I list, let me
apply and manage him as I will, I shall find it an unknown and shapelesse masse. Even
in my writings I shall not at all times find the tracke or air of my first imaginations; I
wot not my self what I would have said, and shall vexe and fret my self in correcting
and giving a new sense to them, because I have perhaps forgotten or lost the former,
which happily was better. I do but come and go; my judgement does not alwaies go
forward, but is ever floting and wandering.
----- velut minuta magno
Deprensa navis in mari, vesaniente vento. -- Catul. Lyr. Epig. xxii.12.
Much like a petty skiffe, that’s taken short
In a grand Sea, when winds do make mad sport.
Many times (as commonly it is my hap to do) having for exercise and sport-sake
undertaken to maintaine an opinion contrary to mine, my mind applying and turning it
self that way does so tie me unto it, as I find no more the reason of my former conceit,
and so I leave it. Where I encline, there I entertaine my self however it be, and am
carried away by my own weight. Every man could neer-hand say as much of himself
would he but looke into himself as I do. Preachers know that the emotion which
surprises them whilst they are in their earnest speech does animate them towards belief,
and that being angrie we more violently give ourselves to defend our proposition, emprint
it in ourselves, and embrace the same with more vehemence and approbation than we did
being in our temperate and reposed sense. You relate simply your case unto a Lawyer; he
answers faltring and doubtfully unto it, whereby you perceive it is indifferent unto him to
defend either this or that side, all is one to him. Have you paid him well, have you given
him a good baite or fee to make him earnestly apprehend it, beginnes he to be enterested
in the matter, is his will moved or his mind enflamed? Then will his reason be moved
and his knowledge enflamed with all. See then an apparent and undoubted truth presents it
self to his understanding, wherein he discovers a new light, and believes it in good sooth,
and so perswades himself. Shall I tell you? I wot not whether the heate proceedingk of
spight and obstinacy against the impression and violence of a magistrate and of danger: or
the interest of reputation have induced some man to maintaine, even in the fiery flames,
the opinion for which amongst his friends and at liberty he would never have been
moved nor have ventured his fingers end. The motions and fits which our soul receiveth
by corporall passions do greatly prevaile in her, but more her own, with which it is so

fully possest, as happily it may be maintained she has no other or motion than by the
blasts of her winds, and that without their agitation she should remaine without action, as
a ship at sea which the winds have utterly forsaken. And he who should maintaine that
following the Peripatetike faction should offer us no great wrong, since it is known that
the greatest number of the soules actions proceede and have neede of this impulsion of
passion; valor (say they) cannot be perfected without the assistance of choler.
Semper Aiax fortis, fortissimus tamen in furore. -- CIC. Tusc. Qu. iv.
Ajax every valor had,
Most then, when he was most mad.
Nor does any man run violently enough upon the wicked, or his enemies, except he be
throughly angrie; and they are of opinion that an advocate or counsellor at the barre, to
have the cause go on his side, and to have justice at the judges hands, does first endevor
to provoke him to anger. Longing-desires moved Themistocles and urged Demosthenes,
and have provoked Philosophers to long travels, to tedious watchings, and to lingring
peregrinations and leads us to honors, to doctrine, and to heal th: all profitable respects.
And this demissenes of the soul in suffering molestion and tediousness, serveth to no
other purpose, but to breed repentance and cause penitence in our consciences, and for our
punishment to feel the scourge of God and the rod of politike correction. Compassion
serveth as a sting unto clemencie, and wisdom to preserve and governe ourselves, is by
our own fear rouzed up; and how many noble actions by ambition, how many by
presumption. To conclude, no eminent or glorious virtue can be without some immoderate
and irregular agitation. May not this be one of the reasons which moved the Epicureans
to discharge God of all care and thought of our affairs: forasmuch as the very effects of
his goodnesse cannot exercise themselves towards us without disturbing his rest by
means of the passions which are as motives and solicitations directing the soul to
vertuous actions? Or have they thought otherwise, and take them as tempests which
shamefully lead astray the soul from her rest and tranquillitie? Vt maris tranquillita
intelligitur, nulla, ne minima quidem, aura fluctus, commovente: Sic animi quietus et
placatus status cernitur, quam perturbatio nulla est, qua moveri queat: (Cic. ibid. v.) ’As
we conceive the seas calmnesse, when not so much as the least pirling wind does stir the
waves, so is a peaceable reposed state of the mind then seen when there is no
perturbation whereby it may be moved.’ What differences of sense and reason, what
contrarietie of imaginations does the diversitie of our passions present unto us? What
assurance may we then take of so unconstant and wavering a thing, subject by its own
condition to the power of trouble, never marching but a forced and borrowed pace? If our
judgement be in the hands of sickenes itself and of perturbation; if by rashnesse and folly
it be retained to receive the impression of things, what assurance may we expect at his
hands? Dares not Philosophie think that men produce their greatest effects, and neerest
approaching to divinity when they are besides themselves, furious, and madde? We amend
ourselves by the privation of reason, and by her drooping. The two natural waies to enter

the cabinet of the Gods, and there to foresee the course of the destinies, are fury and
sleepe. This is very pleasing to be considered. By the dislocation that passions bring into
our reason, we become vertuous; by the extirpation which either fury or the image of
death bringeth us, we become Prophets and Divines. I never beleeved it more willingly. It
is a meere divine inspiration that sacred truth has inspired in a Philosophical spirit which
against his proposition exacteth from him; that the quiet state of our soul, the best-settled
estate, indeed the healthfullesi that Philosophy can acquire unto it, is not the best estate. Our
vigilancie is more drouzie then asleepe itself: our wisdom less wise then folly; our
dreames of more worth then our discourses. The worst place we can take is in ourselves.
But thinks it not that we have the foresight to marke, that the voice which the spirit
uttereth when he is gone from man so clear sighted, so great, and so perfect, and whilst
he is in man so earthly, so ignorant, and so overclouded, is a voice proceeding from the
spirit which is in earthly, ignorant, and overclouded man; and therefore a trustles and not
to be-believed voice? I have no great experience in these violent agitations, being of a soft
and dull complexion, the greatest part of which, without giving it leisure to acknowledge
herself, do sodainely surprise our soul. But that passion, which in young mens harts is
saied to be produced by idleness, although it march but leasurely and with a measured
progress, does evidently present to those that have assaid to oppose themselves against her
endeavor, the power of the conversion and alteration which our judgement suffereth. I
have some times enterprised to arm my self with a resolution to abide, resist, and
suppresse the same. For I am so far from being in their rank that call and allure vices,
that unless they draw me I scarcely follow them. I felt it mauger my resistance, to breed,
to growe, and to augment; and in the end, being in perfect health and clear sighted, to
seize upon and pollute me; in such sort that as in drunkennes the image of things began to
appeare unto me other wise then it was wont. I saw the advantages of the subject I sought
after evidently to swell and grow greater, and much to encrease by the winde of my
imagination; and the difficulties of my enterprise to become more easy and plaine, and
my discourse and conscience to shrinke and draw backe. But that fire being evaporated all
on a sodaine, as by the flashing of a lightning, my soul to reassume an other sight, an
other state, and other judgement. The difficultie in my retreate seemed great and
invincible, and the very same things of another taste and show than the fervency of desire
had presented them unto me. And which more truly, Pyrrho cannot tell. We are never
without some infirmitie. Fevers have their heat and their cold: from the effects of a
burning passion, we fall into the effects of a chilling passion. So much as I had cast my
self forward, so much do I draw my self backe.
Qualis ubi alterno procurrens gurgite pontus,
Nunc ruit ad terrar, scopilisque superjacit undam,
Spumeus, extremamque sinu prefundit arenam,
Nunc rapidus retro, atque æstu rvoluta resorbens
Saxa, fugit, littusque vado labente relinquit. -- VIRG. Æn. xi. 508
As the Ocean flowing, ebbing in due course,

To land now rushes, foming throws his fource
On rocks, therewith bedewes the utmost sand,
Now swift returns the stones rowld backe from strand
By tide resucks, foord failing, leaves the land.
Now by the knowledge of my volubilitie, I have by accident engendred some constancy
of opinions in my self; indeed have not so much altered my first and natural ones. For, what
apparance soever there be in novelty, I do not easily change for fear I should lose by the
bargaine: and since I am not capable to chuse, I take the choice from others; and keep my
self in the seate that God has placed me in. Else could I hardly keep my self from
continuall rowling. Thus have I by the Grace of God preserved my self whole (without
agitation or trouble of conscience) in the ancient beliefe of our religion, in the middest of
so many sects and divisions which our age has brought forth. The writings of the ancient
fathers (I meane the good, the solid, and the serious) do tempt, and in a manner remove
me which way they list. Him that I hear seems ever the most forcible. I find them
everie one in his turn to have reason, although they contrary one another. That facility
which good witts have to prove any thing they please likely; and that there is nopthing so
strange but that they will undertake to set so good a gloss on it, as it shall easily deceive a
simplicity like unto mine, does manifestly show the weaknesse of their proofe. The
heavens and the planets have moved these three thousand years, and all the world
beleeved as much, until Cleanthes the Samian, or else (according to Theophrastus)
Nicetas the Syracusian took upon him to maintaine, it was the earth that moved, by the
oblique circle of the Zodiake, turning about her axell tree. And in our days Copernicus
has so well grounded this doctrine, that he does orderly fit it to all astrologicall
consequences. What shall we reape by it but only that we neede not care which of the
two it be? And who knows whether a thousand years hence a third opinion will rise,
which happily shall overthrow these two precedents?
Sic volvenda ætas vommutat tempora rerum,
Quodque fuit pretio, fit nullo denique honore,
Porro aliud succedit, et contemptibus exit,
Inque dies magis appetitur, floretque repertum
Laudibus, et miro est mortales inter honore. -- Lucr. v. 1286.
So age to be past-over alters times of things:
What earst was most esteem’d,
At last nought-worth is deem’d:
Another then succeeds, and from contempt upsprings,
Is daily more desir’d, flowreth as found but then
With praise and wondrous honor amongst mortal men.
So when any new doctrine is represented unto us, we have great cause to suspect it, and

to consider how, before it was invented, the contrary unto it was in credit; and as that has
been reversed by this latter, a third invention may perhaps succeed in after ages,
which in like sort shall front the second. Before the principles which Aristotle found out
were in credit, other principles contented mans reason as his do now content us. What
learning have these men, what particular priviledge, that the course of our invention
should rely only upon them, and that the possession of our beliefe shall for ever hereafter
belong to them? They are no more exempted from being rejected than were their fore-
fathers. If any man urge me with a new argument, it is in me to imagine that, if I cannot
answere it, another can. For, to believe all apparences which we cannot resolve, is meere
simplicitie. It would then follow that all the common sort (whereof we are all part) should
have his beliefe turning and winding like a weather-cocke: for, his soul being soft and
without resistance, should uncessantly be enforced to receive new and admit other
impressions: the latter ever defacing the precedents trace. He that perceiveth himself
weake, ought to answer, according to law termes, that he will conferre with his learned
counsel, or else refer himself to the wisest, f rom whom he has had his prentiseship.
How long is it since physicke came first into the world? It is reported that a new start-up
fellow, whom they call Paracelsus, changeth and subverteth all the order of ancient and so
long received rules, and maintaineth that until this day it has only served to kill people. I
think he will easily verify it. But I suppose it were no great wisdom to hazard my life
upon the trial of his newfangled experience. ’We must not believe all men,’ says the
precept, ’since every man may say all things.’ It is not long since that one of these
professours of novelties and physical reformations told me that all our forefathers had
notoriously abused themselves in the nature and motion of the winds, which, if I should
listen unto him, he would manifestly make me perceive. After I had with some patience
given attendance to his arguments, which were indeed full of likelyhood, I demanded of
him whether they which had sailed according to Theophrastus his laws, went westward
when they bent their course eastward? Or whether they sailed sideling or backward? ’It is
fortune,’ answered he, ’but so it is, they took their marke amisse:’ To whom I then replied
that I would rather follow the effects than his reason. They are things that often shock
together: and it has been told me that in geometry (which supposeth to have gained the
high point of certainty amongst all sc iences) there are found unavoidable demonstrations,
and which subvert the truth of all experience: as James Peletier told me in my own
house, that he had found out two lines bending their course one towards another, as if they
would meet and join together; nevertheless he affirmed that, even unto infinity, they
could never come to touch one another. And the Pyrrhonians use their arguments, and
reason but to destroy the apparance of experience: and it is a wonder to see how far the
supplenesse of our reason has in this design followed them to resist the evidence of
effects: for they affirme that we move not, that we speak not, that there is no weight, nor
heat, with the same force of arguing that we averre the most likeliest things. Ptolomey,
who was an excellent man, had established the bounds of the world; all ancient
philosophers have thought they had a perfect measure thereof, except it were certain
scattered ilands which might escape their knowledge: it had been to Pyrrhonize a
thousand years agoe, had any man gone about to make a question of the art of

cosmography: and the opinions that have been received thereof, of all men in general: it
had been flat heresie to avouch that there were Antipodes. See how in our age an infinite
greatness of firme land has been discovered, not an iland only, nor one particular
country, but a part in greatness very near equall unto that which we knew. Our modern
geographers cease not to affirme that now all is found, and all is discovered:
Nam quod adest præsto, placet, et pollere videtur, -- Ibid. 1422.
For what is present here,
Seemes strong, is held most dear.
The question is now, if Ptolomey was heretofore deceived in the grounds of his reason,
whether it were not folly in me to trust what these late fellowes say of it, and whether it be
not more likely that this huge body which we terme the world is another manner of thing
than we judge it. Plato says that it often changeth his countenance, that the heaven, the
starres, and the sunne do sometimes re-enverse the motion we perceive in them, changing
the east into the west. The Egyptian priests told Herodotus that since their first king,
which was eleaven thousand and odde years (when they made him see the pictures of all
their former kings, drawne to the life in statues) the sun course had changed his course
foure times: that the sea and the earth do enterchangeably change one into an other; that
the worlds birth is undetermined: the like said Aristotle and Cicero. And some one
amongst us averreth that it is altogether eternall, mortal, and new reviving again, by
many vicissitudes, calling Solomon and Esay to witness: to avoid these oppositions, that
God has sometimes been a Creator without a creature; that he has been idle; that he
has unsaid his idlenesse by setting his hand to this work , and that by consequence he is
subject unto change. In the most famous schooles of Greece, the world is reputed a God
framed by another greater and mightier God, and is composed of a body and a soul,
which abideth in his centre, spreading itself by musicall numbers unto his
circumference, divine, thrice happy, very great, most wise and eternall. In it are other
Gods, as the sea, the earth, and planets, which with an harmonious celestiall dance;
sometime meeting, other times far-sundering themselves; now hiding, them shewing
themselves; and changing place, now forward, now backward. Heraclitus firmly
mainitained that the world was composed of fire, and by the destinies order it should one
day burst forth into flames, and be so consumed into cinders, and another day it should be
new borne again. And Apuleius of men says: Sigillatim mortales; cunctim perpetui: (L.
APUL. De Deo; SOCRAT.) ’Severally mortal; altogether everlasting.’Alexander wrote
unto his mother the narration of an Egyptian priest, drawne from out their monuments,
witnessing the antiquitie of that nation, infinite; and comprehending the birth and
progresse of their countries to the life. Cicero and Diodorus said in their days that the
Chaldeans kept a register of foure hundred thousand and odde years; Aristotle, Plinie,
and others, that Zoroaster lived sixe thousand years before Plato. And Plato says that
those of the citty of Sais have memories in writing of eight thousand years, and that the
town of Athens was built a thousand years before the citty of Sais. Epicurus, that at one

same time all things that are looke how we see them, they are all likewise, and in the same
fashion, in diverse other Worlds, which he would have spoken more confidently had he
seen the similitudes and correspondencies of this new-found world of the West Indiæs
with ours, both present and past, by so many strange examples. Truly, when I consider
what has followed our learning by the course of this terrestriall policy, I have diverse
times wondered at my self, to see in so great a distance of times and places, the simpathy
or jumping of so great a number of popular and wild opinions, and of extravagant
customs and beliefes, and which by no means seem to hold with our natural discourse.
Man’s spirit is a wonderful worker of miracles. But this relation has yet a kind of I wot
not what more Heteroclite: which is found both in names and a thousand other things. For
there were found Nations which (as far as we know) had never heard of us, where
circumcision was held in request; where great states and commonwealths were maintained
only by women, and no men: where our fasts and Lent was represented, adding thereunto
the abstinence from women; where our crosses were severall waies in great esteeme. In
some places they adorned and honored their sepulchres with them, and elsewhere
especially that of Saint Andrew, they employed to shield themselves from nightly visions,
and to lay them upon childrens couches, as good against enchantments and witchcrafts. In
another place they found one made of wood, of an exceeding height, worshipped for the
God of raine; which was thrust very deepe into the ground. There was found a very
express and lively image of our Penitentiaries: the use of Miters, the Priestes single life;
the Art of Divination by the entrailes of sacrificed beasts; the abstinence from all sorts of
flesh and fish for their food; the order amongst Priests, in saying of their divine service, to
use a not vulgar but a particular tongue; and this erroneous and foolish conceipt, that the first
God was expelled his throne by a younger brother of his: that they were at first created
with all commodities, which afterward, by reason of their sinnes, were abridged them: that
their territory has been changed; that their natural condition has been much impaired:
that they have heretofore been drowned by the inundation of Waters come from heaven;
that none were saved but a few families, which cast themselves into the cracks or hollows
of high Mountaines, which crackes they stoped very close, so that the Waters could not
enter in, having before shut therin many kinds of beasts: that when they perceived the
Raine to cease and Waters to fall, the first sent out certain doggs, which returned cleane-
washt and wet, they judged that the waters were not yet much falne; and that afterward
sending out some other, which seeing to return all muddy and foul, they issued forth of
the mountaines, to repeople the world again, which they found replenished only with
Serpents. There were places found where they used the persuasion of the day of
judgement, so that they grew wondrous wroth and offended with the Spaniards, who in
digging and searching of riches in their graves, scattered here and there the bones of there
deceased friends, saying that those dispersed bones could very hardly be reconjoyned
again. They also found where they used traffic by exchange, and no otherwise; and had
Faires and Markets for that purpose; they found dwarfes, and such other deformed
creatures, used for the ornament of Princes tables: they found the use of hawking and
fowling according to the nature of their birdes: tyrannical subsidies, and grievances upon
subjects; delicate and pleasant gardens; dancing, tumbling, leaping, and iugling, music

of instruments, armories, dicing-houses, tennisse-courts, and casting lottes, or mumme-
chaunce, wherein they are often so earnest and moody, that they will play themselves and
their liberty: using no other physicke but by charmes: the manner of writing by figures:
beleeving in one first man, universall father of all people. The adoration of one God, who
heretofore lived man in perfect Virginitie, fasting, and penance, preaching the law of
Nature, and the ceremonies of religion; and who vanished out of the world without any
natural death: The opinion of Giants; the use of drunkennesse, with their manner of
drinkes and drinking and pledging of healths; religious ornaments painted over with bones
and dead mens sculs; surplices, holy Water, and holy Water sprinckles, Women and
servants which thrivingly present themselves to be burned or enterred with their deceased
husbands or masters: a law that the eldest or first borne child shall succeed and inherit all:
where nothing at all is reserved for Punies, but obedience: a custom to the promotion of
certain officers of great authority, and where he that is promoted takes upon him a new
name, and quiteth his own: Where they used to cast lime upon the knees of new borne
children, saying unto him: From dust then camest, and to dust then shall return again:
the Arts of Augures or prediction. These vain shadowes of our religion, which are seen
in some of these examples, witness the dignity and divinity thereof. It has not only in
some sort insinuated itself among all infidell Nations on this side by some imitations,
but amongst those barbarous Nations beyond, as it were by a common and supernaturall
inspiration: For amongst them was also found the beliefe of Purgatory, but after a new
form: for, what we ascribe unto fire, they impute unto cold, and imagine that soules are
both purged and punished by the vigor of an extreme coldnesse. This example putteth me
in mind of another pleasant diversity: For, as there were some people found who took
pleasure to unhood the end of their yard, and to cut off the fore-skinne after the manner of
the Mahometans and Jewes, some there were found that made so great a conscience to
unhood it, that with little strings they caried their fore-skin very carefully out-streched and
fastened above, for fear that end should see the aire. And of this other diversity also, that
as we honor our Kings and celebrate our Holy-days with decking and trimming our
selves with the best habilliments we have; in some regions there, to show all disparity and
submission to their King, their subjects present themselves unto him in their basest and
meanest apparrell; and entring unto his pallace they take some old torn garment and put it
over their other attire, to the end all the glory and ornament may shine in their Soveraigne
and Maister.
But let us go on: if Nature enclose within the limits of her ordinary progresse, as all
other things, so the beliefes, the judgments and the opinions of men; if they have their
revolutions, their seasons, their birth, and their death, even as cabbages: if heaven does
move, agitate and rowle them at his pleasure, what powerfull and permanent authority do
we ascribe unto them? If by uncontroled experience we palpably touch, that the form of
our being depends of the aire, of the climate, and of the soile wherein we are borne and
not only the hew, the stature, the complexion and the countenance, but also the soules
facilities: Et plagæ coeli non serum ad robor corporum, sed etiam animorum facit: ’The
climate helpeth not only for strength of body, but of minds,’ says Vegetius: And that the
Goddesse, foundresse of the City of Athens, chose a temperature of a country to situate it

in, that might make the men wise, as the Egyptian Priests taught Solon: Athenis tenue
eoclum: ex quo etiam acutiores putantur Attici: crassum Thebis: itague pingues Thebani,
et valentes: (CIC. De Fato.) ’About Athens is a thin aire, whereby those Country-men are
esteemed the sharper witted: about Thebes the aire is grosse, and therefore the Thebans
were grosse and strong of constitution.’ In such manner that as fruits and beasts do spring
up diverse and different; so men are borne either more or less warlike, martiall, just,
temperate, and docile: here subject to wine, there to theft and whoredome: here inclined to
superstition, addicted to misbehaving; here given to liberty; there to servitude; capable of
some one art or science; grosse-witted or ingenious: either obedient or rebellious; good or
bad, according as the inclination of the place beareth, where they are seated; and being
removed from one soile to another (as plants are) they take a new complexion: which was
the cause that Cirus would never permit the Persians to leave their barren, rough, and
craggie Country, for to transport themselves into another, more gentle, more fertile, and
more plaine: saying, that ’fat and delicious countries make men wanton and effeminate;
and fertile soiles yield infertile spirits.’ If sometime we see one art to flourish, or a
beliefe, and sometimes another, by some heavenly influence: some ages to produce this or
that nature, and so to encline mankind to this or that base: mens spirits one while
flourishing, another while barren, even as fields are seen to be; what become of all those
goodly prerogatives wherewith we still flatter ourselves. Since a wise man may mistake
himself; indeed, many men, and whole nations; and as we say, mans nature either in one
thing or other, has for many ages together mistaken herself. What assurance have we
that at any time she leaveth her mistaking, and that she continueth not even at this day, in
her error? Me thinkes amongst other testimonies of our imbecilities, this one ought not to
be forgotten, that by wishing itself, man cannot yet find out what he wanteth; that not
by enjoying or possession, but by imagination and full wishing, we cannot all agree in one
that we most stand in need of, and would best content us. Let our imagination have free
liberty to cut out and sew at her pleasure, she cannot so much as desire what is fittest to
please and content her.
-----quid enim ratione timemus
Aut cupimus? quid tam dextro pede concipis, ut te
Conatus non pæniteat, votique peracti? -- Juven. Sat. x. 4.
By reason what do we fear, or des ire?
With such dexteritie what doest aspire,
But you eftsoones repentest it,
Though your attempt and vow do hit?
That is the reason why Socrates never requested the gods to give him anything but what
they knew to be good for him. And the public and private prayer of the Lacedemonians
did meerely implie that good and fair things might be granted them, remitting the
election and choise of them to the discretion of the highest power.

Coniugium petimus partumque uxoris, at illis
Notum qui pueri, qualisque futura sit uxor. -- Ibid. 352.
We wish a wife, wifes breeding: we would know,
What children; shall our wife be sheep or shrow.
And the Christian beseecheth God, that his will may be done, least he should fall into
that inconvenience which poets faine of King Midas, who requested of the Gods that
whatsoever he touched might be converted into gold: his praiers were heard, his wine was
gold, his bread gold, the feathers of his bed, his shirt, and his garments were turned into
gold, so that he found himself overwhelmed in the injoying of his desire, and being
enricht with an intolerable commoditie, he must now unpray his prayers:
Attonitus novitate mali, divesque miserque,
Effugere optat opes, et quæ modo voverat, odit -- Ovid. Met. xi. 128.
Wretched and rich, amaz’d at so strange ill,
His riches he would flie, hates his owns will.
Let me speak of my self; being very yong I besought fortune above all things that she
would make me a knight of the order of Saint Michæl, which in those days was very rare,
and the highest tipe of honor the French nobility aymed at; she very kindly granted my
request; I had it. In lieu of raising and advancing me from my place for the attaining of it,
she has much more graciously entreated me, she has debased and depressed it, even unto
my shoulders and under. Cleobis and Biton, Trophonius and Agamedes, the two first
having besought the Goddesse, the two latter their God, of some recompence worthy their
pietie, received death for a reward. So much are heavenly opinions different from ours,
concerning what we have need of. God might grant us riches, honors, long life and
health, but many times to our own hurt. For, whatsoever is pleasing to us, is not alwaies
healthfull for us. If in lieu of former health he send us death, or some worse sicknesse:
Virga tua et baculus tuus ipsa me consolata sunt: (Psal. xxiii. 4.) ’Thy rod and your staffe
has comforted me.’ He does it by the reasons of his providence, which more certainly
considereth and regardeth what is meet for us then we ourselves can do, and we ought to
take it in good part as from a most wise and thrice-friendly hand.
------ si consilium vis,
Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit vtile nostris:
Charior est illis homo quam sibi. -- Juven. Sat. x. 346.
If you will counsell have, give the Gods leave
To weigh what is most meet we should receive,

And what for our estate most profit were:
To them, then to himself man is more dear.
For, to crave honors and charges of them, is to request them to cast you in some battle, or
play at hazard, or some such thing, whereof the event is unknowen to you, and the fruit
uncertaine. There is no combate amongst philosophers so violent and sharpe as that which
arises upon the question of mans chief felicitie, from which (according to Varroe’s
calculation) arose two hundred and foure score Sects. Qui autem de summo hono dissentit,
de tota Philosophiæ ratione disputat: ’But he that disagrees about the chiefest felicitie,
cals in question the whole course of Philosophie.’
Tres mihi convivæ prope dissentire videntur,
Poscentes vario m ultit diversa palato.
Quid dem? quid non dem? renuis tu quod iubet alter:
Quod petis, id sane est invisum acidumque duobus. -- Hor. ii. Epist. ii. 61.
Three guests of mine do seem allmost at ods to fall,
While they with diverse taste for diverse things do call:
What should I give? What not? You will not, what he will;
What you would, to them twaine is hateful, sowre and ill.
Nature should thus answer their contestations and debates. Some say our felicitie
consisteth and is in virtue, others in voluptuousness, others in yielding unto Nature,
some others in learning, others in feeling no manner of pain or sorrow, others for a man
never to suffer himself to be carried away by appearances, and to this opinion seems
this other of ancient Pithagoras to incline,
Nil admirari, propre res est una, Numici,
Solaque, quæ possit facere et servare beatum, -- i. Epist. vi. 1.
Sir, nothing to admire, is the only thing,
That may keep happy, and to happy bring,
which is the end and scope of the Pyrrhonian Sect. Aristotle ascribeth unto magnanimity,
to admire and wonder at nothing. And Archesilaus said that sufference and an upright and
inflexible state of judgement were true felicities; whereas consents and applications were
vices and evils. True it is, that where he establisheth it for a certain Axiome, he started
from Pyrrhonisme. When the Pyrrhonians say that ataraxy is the chief felicitie, which is
the immobilitie of judgement, their meaning is not to speak it affirmatively, but the very
wavering of their mind, which makes them to shun downefalls, and to shrewd themselves
under the shelter of calmenesse, presents this phantasie unto them, and makes them refuse
another. Oh how much do I desire that while I live, either some other learned men, or

Iustus Lipsius, the most sufficient and learned man now living; of a most polished and
judicious wit, true Cosingermane to my Turnebus, had both will, health, and leisure
enough, sincerely and exactly, according to their divisions and formes, to collect into one
volume or register, as much as by us might be seen, the opinions of ancient philosophy,
concerning the subject of our being and customs, their controversies the credit, and
partaking of factions and sides, the application of the authors and sectators lives, to their
precepts in memorable and exemplarie accidents. O what a worthy and profitable labor
would it be! Besides, if it be from ourselves that we draw the regiment of our customs,
into what a bottomles confusion do we cast ourselves? For what our reason perswades us
to be most likely for it, is generally for every man to obey the laws of his country, as is
the advise of Socrates, inspired (says he) by a divine persuasion. And what else meaneth
she thereby, but only that our devoire or duety has no other rule but casual? Truth ought
to have a like and universall visage throughout the world. Law and justice, if man knew
any, that had a body and true essence, he would not fasten it to the condition of this or that
countries customs. It is not according to the Persians or Indians fantazie that virtue
should take her form. Nothing is more subject unto a continuall agitation then the laws. I
have, since I was borne, seen those of our neighbors, the English-men, changed and re-
changed three or foure times, not only in politike subjects, which is that some will
dispense of constancy, but in the most important subject that possibly can be, that is to
say, in religion: whereof I am so much the more ashamed, because it is a nation with
which my countriemen have heretofore had so inward and familiar acquaintance, that even
to this day there remain in my house some ancient monuments of our former alliance.
Nay, I have seen amongst ourselves some things become lawfull which erst were
deemed capital: and we that hold some others, are likewise in possibilitie, according to
the uncertainty of warring fortune, one day or other, to be offenders against the Majestie
both of God and man, if our justice chance to fall under the mercy of justice; and in the
space of few years possession, taking a contrary essence. How could that ancient God
more evidently accuse, in humane knowledge, the ignorance of divine essence, and teach
men that their religion was but a peece of their own invention, fit to combine their
societies then in declaring, as he did, to those which sought the instruction of it, by his
sacred Tripos, that the true worshipping of God was that which he found to be observed
by the custom of the place where he lived? Oh God, what bond or dutie is it that we owe
not to our Soveragne Creators benignitie, in that he has been pleased to clear and
enfranchise our beliefe from those vagabonding and arbitrary devotions, and fixt it upon
the eternall base of his holy word? What will Philosophie then say to us in this necessity?
that we follow the laws of our country, that is to say, this waveing sea of a peoples or of
a Princes opinions, which shall paint me forth justice with as many colours, and reforme
the same into as many visages as there are changes and alterations of passions in them. I
cannot have my judgement so flexible. What goodnesse is that which but yesterday I saw
in credit and esteeme, and to morrow to have lost all reputation, and that the crossing of a
river is made a crime? What truth is that which these Mountaines bound, and is a lie in the
world beyond them? But they are pleasant, when to allow the laws some certaintie, they
say that there be some firme, perpetuall and immoveable; which they call natural, and by

the condition of their proper essence, are imprinted in mankind: of which some make three
in number, some foure, some more, some less: an evident token that it is a marke as
doubtfull as the rest. Now are they so unfortunate (for how can I terme that but
misfortune, that of so infinit a number of laws there is not so much as one to be found
which the fortune or temeritie of chance has graunted to be universally received, and by
the consent of unanimitie of all Nations to be admitted?) they are (I say) so miserable that
of these three or four choice-selected laws there is not one alone that is not impugned or
disallowed, not by one nation, but by many. Now is the generalitie of approbation the
only likely ensigne by which they may argue some laws to be natural; for what nature
had indeed ordained us, that should we doubtlesse follow with one common consent; and
not one only nation, but every man in particular should have a feeling of the force and
violece which he should urge him with, that would incite him to contrary and resist that
law. Let them all (for example sake) show me but one of this condition. Protagoras and
Ariston gave the justice of the laws no other essence, but the authority and opinion of the
law giver, and that excepted, both good and honest lost their qualities, and remained but
vain and idle names of indifferent things. Thrasymachus, in Plato, thinkes there is no
other right but the commoditie of the superior. There is nothing wherein the world
differeth so much as in customs and laws. Some things are here accompted abominable,
which in another place are esteemed commendable; as in Lacedemonia, the slight and
subtlety in stealing marriages in proximity of blood are amongst us forbidden as capital,
elsewhere they are allowed and esteemed;
-----gentes esse feruntur,
In quibus et nato genitrix, et nata parenti
Iungitur, et pietas geminato crescit amore. -- Ovid. Met. x. 331.
There are some people where the another weddeth
Her son the daughter her own father beddeth,
And so by doubling love, their kinduesse spreddeth.
The murthering of children and of parents; the communication with women; traffic of
jobbing and stealing; free licence to all manner of sensuality; to conclude, there is nothing
so extreme and horrible, but is found to be received and allowed by the custom of some
nation. It is credible that there be natural laws, as may be seen in other creatures, but in
us they are lost: this goodly humane reason engrafting itself among all men, to sway and
command, confounding and topsi-turving the visage of all things according to her
inconstant vanity and vain inconstancy. Nihil itaque amplius nostrum est, quod nostrum
dico, artis est: ’Therefore nothing more is ours: all that I call ours belongs to art.’
Subjects have diverse lustres, and severall considerations, whence the diversity of opinion
is chiefly engendred. One nation vieweth a subject with one visage, and thereon it staies;
an other with an other. Nothing can be imagined so horrible as for one to eate and devour
his own father. Those people which anciently kept this custom hold it nevertheless for
a testimony of pietie and good affection: seeking by that meane to give their fathers the

worthiest and most honorable sepulchre, harboring their fathers bodies and reliques in
themselves, and in their marrow; in some sort reviving and regenerating them by the
transmutation made in their quick flesh by digestion and nourishment. It is easy to be
considered what abomination and cruelty it had been, in men accustomed and trained in
this inhumane superstition, to cast the carcases of their parents into the corruption of the
earth, as food for beasts and wormes. Lycurgus wisely considereth in theft, the vivacitie,
dilignce, courage, and nimblenesse that is required in surprising or taking any thing from
ones neighbour, and the commoditie which thereby redoundeth to the common-wealth,
that every man heedeth more curiously the keeping of that which is his own, and judged
that by this twofold institution to assaile and to defend, much good was drawne for
military discipline (which was the principal Science and chief verue wherein he would
enable that nation) of greater respect and more consideration than was the disorder and
injustice of prevailing and taking other mens goods. Dionysius, the tyrant offered Plato a
robe made after the Persian fashion, long, damask, and perfumed: but he refused the same,
saying, ’That being borne a man, he would not willingly put on a womans garment.’ But
Aristippus took it, with this answer, ’That no garment could corrupt a chaste mind.’ His
friends reproved his demissenesse in being so little offended, that Dionysius had spitten in
his face. ’Tut (said he) fishers suffer themselves to be washed over head and ears to get a
gudgion.’ Diogenes washing of coleworts for his dinner, seeing him pass by, said unto
him, ’If you couldest live with coleworts, you would not court and fawne upon a
tyrant;’ to whom Aristippus replied, ’If you couldest live among men, you would not
wash coleworts.’ See here how reason yieldeth apparance to diverse effects. It is a pitcher
with two ears, which a man may take hold on, either by the right or left hand.
----- bellum o terra hospita portas,
Bello arman tur equi, bellum hæc armenta minantur:
Sed tamen iidem olim curru succedere sueti
Quadrupedes, et froena jugo concordia ferre,
Spes est pacis--- -- Virg. Æn. iii. 559.
O stranger-harbring land, you bringst us war;
Steeds serve for war;
These heards do threaten jarre.
Yet horses erst were wont to draw our waines,
And harnest matches bear agreeing raines,
Hope is hereby that we
In peace shall well agree.
Solon being importuned not to shed vain and bootles tears for the death of his son;
’Thats the reason (answered he) I may more justly shed them, because they are bootlesse
and vain.’ Socrates, his wife, exasperated her grief by this circumstance. ’Good Lord
(said she) how unjustly do these bad judges put him to death.’ ’ What! would you
rather they should execute me justly?’ replied he to her. It is a fashion amongst us to have

holes bored in our ears: the Greekes held it for a badge of bondage. We hide ourselves
when we will enjoy our wives: the Indians do it in open view of all men. The Scithians
were wont to sacrifice strangers in their Temples, whereas in other places Churches are
Sanctuaries for them.
Inde furor vulgi, quodnumina vicinorum
Odit quisque locus, cum solos credat habendos
Esse Deos quos ipse colit. -- Juven. Sat. xv. 36.
The vulgar hereupon does rage, because
Each place does hate their neighbors sovereign laws,
And only Gods does deem,
Those Gods, themselves esteeme.
I have heard it reported of a Judge who, when he met with any sharp conflict betweene
Bartolus and Baldus, or with any case admitting contrarieties was wont to write in the
margin of his book, ’A question for a friend,’ which is to say, that the truth was so
entangled and disputable that in such a case he might favor which party he should think
good. There was no want but of spirit and sufficiency, if he set not every where through
his books, ’A question for a friend.’ The Advocates and Judges of our time find in all cases
byases too-too-many to fit them where they think good. To so infinite a science,
depending on the authority of so many opinions, and of so arbitrary a subject, it cannot be
but that an exceeding confusion of judgements must arise. There are very few processes so
clear but the Lawiers advises upon them will be found to differ: What one company has
judged another will adjudge the contrary, and the very same will another time change
opinion. Whereof we see ordinary examples by this licence which wonderfully
blemisheth the authority and lustre of our law, never to stay upon one sentence, but to run
from one to another judge, to decide one same case. Touching the liberty of
Philosophicall opinions concerning vice and virtue, it is a thing needing no great
extension, and wherein are found many advises which were better unspoken then
published to weake capacities. Arcesilaus was wont to say that in pailliardize it was not
worthy consideration, where, on what side, and how it was done. Et obcænas voluptates,
si natura requirit, non genera, aut loco, aut ordine, sed forma, ætate, figura metiendas
Epicurus putat. Ne amores quidem sanctos a sapiente atienos esse arbitrantur. Quæramus
ad quam usque, ætatem iuvenes amandi sint: ’Obscene pleasures, if nature require them,
the Epicure esteemeth not to be measured by kind, place, or order: but by form, age, and
fashion. Nor does he think that holy loves should be strange from a wise man. Let us then
question to what years yong folke may be beloved.’ These two last Stoice places, and
upon this purpose, the reproch of Diogarchus to Plato himself, show how many
excessive licences and out of common use soundest Philosophy does tolerate. Lawes take
their authority from possession and custom. It is dangerous to reduce them to their
beginning: In rowling on they swell and grow greater and greater, as do our rivers:
follow them upward into their source, and you shall find them but a bubble of water,

scarce to be discerned, which in gliding on swelleth so proud and gathers so much
strength. Behold the ancient considerations which have given the first motion to this
famous torrent, so full of dignitie, of honor and reverence, you shall find them so light
and weake that these men which will weigh all and complain of reason, and who receive
nothing upon trust and authority, it is no wonder if their judgments are often far distant
from common judgement. Men that take Natures first image for a patterne it is no
marvaile if in most of their opinions they miss the common-beaten path. As for example
few amongst them would have approved the false conditions of our marriages, and most
of them would have had women in community and without any private respect. They
refused our ceremonies: Chrysippus said that some Philosophers would in open view of all
men show a dozen of tumbling-tricks, indeed, without any slops or breeches, for a dozen of
olives. He would hardly have persuaded Calisthenes to refuse his fair daughter Agarista
to Hippoclides, because he had seen him graft the forked tree in her upon a table.
Metrocles somewhat indiscreetly, as he was disputing in his Schole, in presence of his
auditory, let a fart, for shame whereof he afterwards kept his house and could not be
drawen abroad until such time as Crates went to visit him, who to his persuasions and
reasons, adding the example of his liberty, began to fart a vie with him and to remove this
scruple from off his conscience; and moreover won him to his Stoicall (the more free)
Sect, from the Peripateticall (and more civill) one, which the-therunto he had followed.
That which we call civilitie not to dare to do that openly, which amongst us is both
awful and honest, being done in secret, they termed folly: And to play the wilie Foxe in
concealing and disclaiming what nature, custom, and our desire publish and proclaims of
our actions, they deemed to be a vice. And thought it a suppressing of Venus her mysteries
to remove them from out the private vestry of her temple, and expose them to the open
view of the people. And that to draw her sports from out the curtaines was to loose them.
Shame is matter of some consequence. Concealing, reservation and circumspection are
parts of estimation. That sensuality under the maske of Vertu did very ingeniously procure
not to be prostituted in the midst of highwaies, not trodden upon and seen by the common
sort, alledging the dignity and commodity of her wonted Cabinets. Whereupon some say
that to forbid and remove the common brothel-houses is not only to spread whoredome
every where, which only was allotted to those places, but also to incite idle and vagabond
men to that vice by reason of the difficultie.
Mæchus es Aufidiæ qui vir Corvine fuisti,
Rivalis fuerat qui tuus, ille vir est.
Cur aliena placet tibi, qua, tua non placet uxor?
Nunquid securas non potes arrigere? -- Mart. iii. Epig. lxx.
This experience is diversified by a thousand examples.
Nullus in vrbe fuit tota, qui tangere vellet
Uxorem gratis Cæciliane tuam,
Dum licuit: sed nunc positis custodibus, inqens

Turba fututorum est, in geniosus homo es. -- i. Epig. lxxiv.
A Philosopher being taken with the deed, was demaunded what he did, answered very
mildly, ’I plant man,’ blushing no more being found so napping than if he had been taken
setting of Garlike. It is (as I suppose) of a tender and respective opinion that a notable and
religious Author holds this action so necessarily-bound to secrecy and shame, that in
Cynike embracements and dalliances he could not be persuaded that the work should
come to her end; but rather that it lingred and stayed only to represent wanton gestures and
lascivious motions, to maintaine the impudency of their schooles profession: and that to
powre forth what shame had forced and bashfullnesse restrained, they had also afterward
need to seek some secret place. He had not seen far enough into their licenciousnesse:
for Diogenes in sight of all, exercising his Masturbation, bred a longing desire in the
bystanders, that in such sort they might fill their bellies by rubbing or clawing the same.
To those that asked him why he sought for no fitter place to feed in than in the open
frequented highway he made answer, ’It is because I am hungry in the open frequented
high-way.’ The Philosophers Women, which medled with their Sects, did likewise in all
places and without any discretion medle with their bodies: And Crates had never received
Hipparchia into his fellowship but upon condition to follow all the customs and fashions
of his order. These Philosophers set an extreme rate on virtue and rejected al other
disciplins except the mortal; hence it is that in all actions they ascribed the Soveraigne
authority to the election of their wise, indeed, and above all laws: and appointed no other
restraint unto voluptuousness, but the moderation and preservation of others liberty.
Heraclitus and Protagoras, forasmuch as wine seems bitter unto the sicke and pleasing
to the healthy; and an oar crooked in the water and straight to them that see it above
water, and such-like contrary apparances which are found in some subjects; argued that all
subjects had the causes of these apparances in them, and that there was some kind of
bitternes in the wine which had a reference unto the sick mans taste; in the oar a certain
crooked quality, having relation to him that seeth it in the water. And so of all things else.
Which implieth, that all is in all things, and by consequence nothing in any : for either
nothing is, or all is. This opinion put me in mind of the experience we have, that there is
not any one sense or visage, either straight or crooked, bitter or sweet, but mans wit shall
find in the writings which he undertaketh to run over. In the purest, most unspotted, and
most absolutely perfect word that possibly can be, how many errors, falshoods and lies
have been made to proceed from it? What heresie has not found testimon ies and ground
sufficient, both to undertake and to maintaine itself? It is, therefore, that the Authors of
such errors will never go from this proofe of the testimony of words interpretation. A
man of worth going about by authority to approve the search of the Philosophers stone
(wherein he was overwhelmed) alleadged at least five or six several passages out of the
holy bible unto me, upon which (he said) he had at first grounded himself for the
discharge of his conscience (for he is a man of Ecclesiastical profession), and truly the
invention of them was not only pleasant, but also very fitly applied to the defense of this
goodly and mind-enchanting science. This way is the credit of divining fables attained to.
There is no prognosticator if he have but this authority that any one wil but vouchsafe to

read him over, and curiously to search all the infoldings and lustres of his words, but a
man shall make him say what he pleaseth, as the Sibils. There are so many means of
interpretation that it is hard, be it flat-long, side-long, or edge-long, but an ingenious and
pregnant wit shal in all subjects meet with some aire that wil fit his turn. Therefore is a
clowdy, darke and ambiguous stile found in so frequent and ancient custom, that the
Author may gain to draw, allure, and busie posterity to himself, which not only the
sufficiency but the casual favor of the matter may gain as much or more. As for other
matters let him, be it either through foolishnes or subtilty, show himself somewhat obscure
and diverse, it is no matter, care not he for that. A number of spirits sifting and tossing him
over will find and express sundry formes, either according, or collaterally, or contrary to
his own, all which shall do him credit. He shal see himself enriched by the means of
his Disciples, as the Grammer Schools Maisters. It is that which has made many things of
nothing, to pass very currant, that has brought diverse books in credit, and charged with all
sorts of matter that any has but desired: one selfsame thing admitting a thousand and a
thousand, and as many severall images and diverse considerations, as it best pleaseth us. Is
it possible that ever Homer meant all that which some make him to have meant? And that
he prostrated hiniselfe to so many, and so severall shapes, as, Divines, Lawiers, Captains,
Philosophers, and all sort of people else, which, how diversely and contrary soever it be
they treat of sciences, do notwithstanding wholy rely, upon him, and refer themselves unto
him as a General Maister for all offices, workes, sciences, and tradesmen, and an
universall counsellor in all enterprises; whosoever has had need of Oracles or
Predictions, and would apply them to himself, has found them in him for his purpose. A
notable man, and a good friend of mine, would make one marvel to bear what strange far-
fetcht conceits and admirable affinities, in favor of our religion, he maketh to derive from
him; and can hardly be drawne from this opinion, but that such was Homers intent and
meaning (yet is Homer so familiar unto him, as I think no man of our age is better
acquainted with him). And what he finds in favor of our religion, many ancient learned
men have found in favor of theirs. See how Plato is tossed and turned over, every man
endevoring to apply him to his purpose, gives him what construction he list. He is
wrested and inserted to all newfangled opinions that the world receiveth or all oweth of,
and according to the different course of subjects is made to be repugnant unto himself.
Every one according to his sense makes him to disavow the customs that were lawfull in
his days, inasmuch as they are unlawfull in these times. All which is very lively and
strongly maintained, according as the wit and learning of the interpreter is strong and
quick. Upon the ground which Heraclitus had, and that sentence of his, that all things
had those shapes in them which men found in them. And Democritus out of the very same
drew a cleane contrary conclusion, id est, that subjects had nothing at all in them of that
which we found in them. And forasmuch as honny was sweet to one man and bitter to
another, he argued that honny was neither sweet nor bitter. The Pyrrhonians would say
they know not whether it be sweet or bitter, or both or neither: for, they ever gain the
highest point of doubting. The Cyrenaicks held that nothing was perceptible outwardly,
and only that was perceivable which by the inward touch or feeling touched or concerned
us, as grief and sensuality, distinguishing neither tune nor collours, but only certain

affections that came to us of them; and that man had no other seate of his judgment.
Protagoras deemed that to be true to all men, which to all men seems so. The
Epicurians place all judgment in the senses, and in the notice of things, and in
voluptuousness. Platoes mind was, that the judgmen t of truth, and truth itself drawne
from opinions and senses, belonged to the spirit and to cogitation. This discourse has
drawne me to the consideration of the senses, wherein consisteth the greatest foundation
and trial of our ignorance. Whatsoever is known, is without perhaps known by the
faculty of the knower: for, since the judgment commeth from the operation of him that
judgeth, reason requireth that he performe and act this operation by his means and will,
and not by others compulsion: as it would follow if we knew things by the force, and
according to the law of their essence. Now all knowledge is addressed unto us by the
senses: they are our maisters:
-----via qua munita fidei
Proxima fert humanum in pectus, templaque mentis. -- Lucr. v. 102.
Whereby a way for credit leads well-linde
Into man’s breast and temple of his mind.
Science begins by them and in them is resolved. After all, we should know no more then a
stone, unless we know that here is sound, smell, light, savor, measure, weight, softnesse,
hardnesse, sharpnesse, colour, smoothnesse, breadth and depth. Behold here the platforme
of all the frame and principles of the building of all our knowledge. And according to
some, science is nothing else but what is known by the senses. Whosoever can force me
to contradict my senses, has me fast by the throate, and cannot make me recoyle one
foote backward. The senses are the beginning and end of humane knowledge.
Invenies primis ab sensibus esse creatam
Notitiam veri, neque sensus posse refelli.
Quid maiore fide porro, quam sensus, haberi Debet? -- iv. 480,484.
You shall find knowledge of the truth at first was bred
From our first senses, nor can senses be misseled.
What, then our senses, should
With us more credit hold?
Attribute as little as may be unto them, yet must this ever be graunted them, that all our
instruction is addressed by their means and intermission. Cicero says that Chrysippus
having assaid to abate the power of his senses, and of their virtue, presented contrary
arguments unto himself, and so vehement oppositions, that he could not satisfie himself.
Whereupon Carneades (who defended the contrary part boasted that he used the very
same weapons and words of Chrysippus to combate against him and therefore cried out

upon him, ’Oh miserable man! thine own strength has foiled you.’ There is no greater
absurditie in our judgment, then to maintaine that fire heateth not, that light shineth not,
that in iron there is neither weight nor firmenesse, which are notices our senses bring unto
us: Nor beliefe or science in man, that may be compared unto that, in certaintie. The first
consideration I have upon the senses subject is, that I make a question, whether man be
provided of all natural senses, or no. I see diverse creatures that live an entire and perfect
life, some without sight, and some without hearing; who knows whether we also want
either one, two, three, or many senses more: For, if we want any one, our discourse cannot
discover the want or defect thereof. It is the senses priviledge to be the extreme bounds of
our perceiving. There is nothing beyond them that may stead us to discover them: No one
sense can discover another.
An poterunt oculos aures reprehendere, an aures
Tactus, an hunc porro tactum sapor arguet oris,
An confutabunt nares, oculive revincent? -- 488.
Can ears the eyes, or can touch reprehend
The cares, or shall mouthes taste that touch amend?
Shall our nose it confute, Or eyes gainst it dispute?
They all make the extreamest line of our facultie.
-----seorsum cuique potestas
Divisa est, sua vis cuique est. -- 491.
To teach distinctly might
Is shar’de, each has its right.
It is impossible to make a man naturally blind, to conceive that he seeth not; impossible to
make him desire to see, and sorrow his defect. Therefore ought we not to take assurance
that our mind is contented and satisfied with those we have, seeing it has not wherewith
to feel her own malady, and perceive her imperfection, if it be in any It is impossible to
tell that blind man any thing, either by discourse, argument, or similitude, that lodgeth any
apprehension of light, colour, or sight in his imagination. There is nothing more backward
that may push the senses to any evidence. The blind-borne, which we perceive desire to
se, it is not to understand what they require; they have learnt of us that something they
want, and something they desire, that is in us, with the effects and consequences thereof,
which they call good: yet wot not they what it is, nor apprehend they it near or far. I have
seen a gentleman of a good house, borne blind, at least blind in such an age that he
knowes not what sight is; he understandeth so little what he wanteth, that as we do, he
useth words fitting sight, and applieth them after a manner only proper and peculiar to
himself. A child being brought before him to whom he was god-father, taking him in his

arms, he said, ’Good Lord, what a fine child this is! it is a goodly thing to see him. What
a cherefull countenance he has! how prettily he looketh!’ He will say as one of us, ’This
hall has a fair prospect. It is very fair weather, The Sunne shines clear.’ Nay, which is
more: because hunting, hawking, tennis-play, and shuting at buts are our common sports
and exercises (for so he has heard) his mind will be so affected unto them, and he wil so
busie himself about them, that he will think to have as great an interest in them as any of
us, and show himself as earnestly passionate, both in liking and disliking them, as any
else; yet does he conceive and receive them but by hearing. If he be in a fair champion
ground, where he may ride, they will tell him, yonder is a Hare started, or the Hare is
killed, he is as busily earnest of his game as he heareth others to be that have perfect sight.
Give him a ball, he takes it in the left hand, and with the right strikes it away with his
racket; in a piece he shutes at randome; and is well pleased with what his men tell him, be
it high or wide. Who knowes whether mankind commit as great a folly, for want of some
sense, and that by this default the greater part of the visage of things be concealed from
us? Who knowes whether the difficulties we find in sundry of Natures workes proceede
thence? And whether diverse effects of beasts, which exceed our capacitie, are produced
by the facultie of some sense that we want? And whether some of them have by that
meane a fuller and more perfect life then ours? We seize on an apple well nigh with all our
senses; we find rednesse, smoothnesse, odor and sweetness in it; besides which, it may
have other vertues, either drying or binding, to which we have no sense to be referred. The
proprieties which in many things we call secret, as in the Adamant to draw iron, is it not
likely there should be sensitive faculties in nature able to judge and perceive them, the
want whereof breedeth in us the ignorance of the true essence of such things? It is happily
some particular sense that unto cockes or chanticleares discovereth the morning and
midnight hour, and moveth them to crow: that teacheth a hen, before any use or
experience, to fear a hawke and not a goose or a peacocke, far greater birds: that
warneth yong chickins of the hostile quality which the cat has against them, and not to
distrust a dog; to strut and arm themselves against the mewing of the one (in some sort a
flattering and mild voice) and not against the barking of the other (a snarling and
quarrelous voice): that instructeth rats, wasps, and emmets, ever to chuse the best cheese
and fruit, having never tasted them before: and that addresseth the stag, the elephant, and
the serpent, to the knowledge of certain herbs and simples, which, being either wounded
or sicke, have the virtue to cure them. There is no sense but has some great domination,
and which by his meane affordeth not an infinite number of knowledges. I f we were to
report the intelligence of sounds, of harmony and of the voice, it would bring an
imaginable confusion to all the rest of our learning and science. For, besides what is tyed
to the proper effect of every sense, how many arguments, consequences, and conclusions
draw we unto other things, by comparing one sense to another? Let a skilfull, wise man
but imagine humane nature to be originally produced without sight and discourse, how
much ignorance and trouble such a defect would bring unt o him, and what obscurity and
blindnesse in our mind.’ By that shall we perceive how much the privation of one, or two,
or three such senses (if there be any in us) does import us about the knowledge of truth.
We have by the consultation and concurrence of our five senses formed one Verity,

whereas perhaps there was required the accord and consent of eight or ten senses,
and their contribution, to attaine a perspicuous insight of her, and see her in her true
essence. Those Sects which combate mans science, do principally combate the same by
the uncertainty and feeblenesse of our senses. For, since by their meane and intermission
all knowledge comes unto us, if they chance to misse in the report they make unto us, if
either they corrupt or alter that, which from abroad they bring unto us, if the light which
by them is transported into our soul be obscured in the passage, we have nothing else to
hold by. From this extreme difficultie are sprung all these phantazies, which everie subject
containeth, whatsoever we find in it, that it has not what we suppose to find in it, and
that of the Epicurians, which is; that the sunne is no greater than our sight does judge it:
Quicquid id est, nihilo fertur maiore figura,
Quam nostris oculis quam cernimus esse videtur: -- Lucr. v. 576.
Whate’er it be, it in no greater form does pass,
Then to our eyes, which it behold, it seeming was:
that the apparances, which represent a great body to him that is neare unto it, and a much
lesser to him that is further from it, are both true:
Nec tamen hic oculis falli concedimzus hilum:
Proinde animi vitium hoc oculis adfingere noli: -- iv. 380,387.
Yet graunt we not, in this, our eyes deceiv’d or blind,
Impute not then to eyes this error of the mind:
and resolutely, that there is no deceit in the senses that a man must stand to their mercy,
and elsewhere seek reasons to excuse the difference and contradiction we find in them:
indeed invent all other untruthes and raving conceits (so far come they) rather than accuse
the senses. Timagoras swore, that however he winked or turned his eyes, he could never
perceive the light of the candle to double: and that this seeming proceeded from the vice
of opinion, and not from the instrument. Of all absurdities the most absurd amongst the
Epicurians is to disavow the force and effect of the senses.
Proinde quod in quoque est his visum tempore, verum est:
Et si non potuit ratio dissolvere causam,
Cur ea quæ fuerint iuxtim quadrata, procul sint
Visa rotunda: tamen præstat rationis egentem
Reddere mendose causas vtriusque figuræ,
Quam manibus manifesta suis emittere quoquam,
Et violare fidem primam, et convellere tota
Fundamenta, quibus nixatur vita salusque.

Non modo enim ratio ruat omnis, vita quoque ipsa
Concidat extemplo, nisi credere sensibus ausis,
Præcipitesque locos vitare, et cætera quæ sint
In genere hoc fugienda. -- Lucr. iv. 502.
What by the eyes is seen at any time, is true,
Though the cause treason could not render of the view,
Why, what was square at hand, a far off seemed round,
Yet it much better were, that wanting reasons ground
The causes of both formes we harp-on, but not hit,
Then let slip from our hands things clear, and them omit,
And violate our first beliefe, and rashly rend
All those ground-workes, whereon both life and health depend,
For not alone all reason falls, life likewise must
Faile out of hand, unless your senses you dare trust,
And breake-neeke places, and all other errours shunne,
From which we in this kind most carefully should run.
This desperate and so little Philosophicall counsell, represents no other thing but that
humane science cannot be maintained but by unreasonable, foolish and mad reason; yet is it
better that man use it to prevaile, indeed of all other remedies else how phantasticall
soever they be, rather than avow his necessarie foolishnesse: So prejudiciall and
disadvantageous a veritie he cannot avoide, but senses must necessarily be the Soveraigne
maisters of his knowledge; but they are uncertaine and falsifi able to all circumstances.
There must a man strike to the utmost of his power, and if his just forces faile him (as they
are wont) to use and employ obstinacy, temeritie and impudencie. If that which the
Epicurians affirme, be true, that is to say, we have no science, if the apparances of the
senses be false, and that which the Stoics say, if it is also true that the senses apparences
are so false as they can produce us no science; we will conclude at the charges of these
two great Dogmatist Sects, that there is no science. Touching the error and uncertaintie of
the senses operation, a man may store himself with as many examples as he pleaseth, so
ordinary are the faults and deceits they use towards us. And the echoing or reporting of a
valleys the sound of a trumpet seems to sound before us, which cometh a mile behind
us.
Exstantesque procul medio de gargite montes
Idem apparent longe diverse i licet. -- Lucr. iv. 398.
Et fugere ad puppim colles campique videntur
Quos agimus prater navim. -- 390.
-----ubi in medio nobis equus acer obhæsit
Flumine, equi corpus transversum ferre videtur
Vis, et in adversum flumen contrudere raptim. -- 423.

And hills, which from the main far-off to kenning stand,
Appeare all one, though they far distant be, at hand,
And hilles and fields do seem unto our boate to flie,
Which we drive by our boate as we do pass thereby,
When in midst of a streame a stately Horse does stay,
The streame’s orethwarting seems his body crosse to sway,
And swiftly ’gainst the streame to thrust him the other way.
To roule a bullet under the fore finger, the midlemost being put over it, a man must very
much enforce himself to affirme there is but one, so assuredly does our sense present us
two. That the senses do often maister our discourse, and force it to receive impressions
which he knows and judgeth to be false, it is daily seen. I leave the sense of feeling
which has his functions nearer more quick and substantiall, and which by the effect of
the grief or pain it brings to the body does so often confound and re-enverse all these
goodly Stoicall resolutions, and enforceth to cry out of the bellyache him who has with
all resolution established in his mind this doctrine, that the cholike, as every other
sicknesse or pain, is a thing indifferent, wanting power to abate any thing of sovereign
good or chief felicity, wherein the wise man is placed by his own virtue: there is no
heart so demiss, but the rattling sound of a drum or the clang of a trumpet will rowse and
inflame; nor mind so harsh and stern, but the sweetness and harmony of music will
move and tickle; nor any soul so skittish and stubborne, that has not a feeling of some
reverence in considering the clowdy vastitie and gloomie canapies of our churches, the
eye-pleasing diversitie of ornaments, and orderly order of our ceremonies, and hearing
the devout and religious sound of our organs, the moderate, symphonicall, and heavenly
harmonie of our voices: even those that enter into them with an obstinate will and
contemning mind have in their hearts a feeling of remorse, of chilnesse and horrour, that
puts them into a certain diffidence of their former opinions. As for me, I distrust mine
own strength to hear with a settled mind some of Horace or Catullus verses sung with
a sufficiently well tuned voice, uttered by and proceeding from a fair, yong, and hart-
alluring mouth. And Zeno had reason to say that the voice was the flower of beautie.
Some have gone about to make me believe that a man, who most of us French men know,
in repeating of certain verses he had maide, had imposed upon me that they were not
such in writing as in the aire, and that mine eyes would judge of them otherwise than mine
ears: so much credit has pronounciation to give price and fashion to those workes that
pass at her mercy; whereupon Philoxenus was not to be blamed, when hearing one to
give an ill accent to some composition of his, he took in a rage some of his pots or bricks,
and breaking them, trode and trampled them under his feet, saying unto him, ’I breake and
trample what is thine, even as you manglest and marrest what is mine.’ Wherefore did
they (who with an undanted resolve have procured their own death, because they would
not see the blow or stroke coming) turn their face away? And those who for their
health’s sake cause themselves to be cut and cauterized, why cannot they endure the sight
of the preparations, tooles, instruments and workes of the Chirurgion, since the sight can
have no part of the pain or smart? Are not these fit examples to verifie the authority

which senses have over discourse? We may long enough know that such a ones lockes or
flaring tresses are borrowed of a page or taken from some lacky, that this fair ruby-red
came from Spain, and this whitenes or smoothnes from the ocean sea: yet must sight
force us to find and deem the subject more lovely and more pleasing against all reason.
For in that there is nothing of its own.
Auferimur cultu: gemnis, auroque teguntur
Crimina, pars minima est ipsa puelia sui.
Sæpe ubi sit quod ames inter tam multa requiras:
Decepit hac oculos Ægide dives amor. -- Ovid. Rem. Am. i. 343.
We are misse-led by ornaments: what is amisse
Gold and gemmes cover, least part of herself the maiden is, ’
Mongst things so many you may aske, where your love lies,
Rich love by this Gorgonian shield deceives thine eye.
How much do Poets ascribe unto the virtue of the senses which makes Narcissus to have
even fondly lost himself for the love of his shadow ?
Cunctaque miratur, quibus est mirabilis ipsa,
Se cupit imprudens, et qui probat, ipse probatur,
Dumque petit petitur: pariterque accendit et ardit. -- Ovid. metam. iii. 424.
He all admires, whereby himself is is admirable,
Fond he, fond of himseife, to himself amiable,
He that does like, is lik’d, and while he does desire:
He is desired, at once he burnes and sets on fire.
And Pygmalions wit’s so troubled by the impression of the sight of his ivory statue that
he loves and serves it as if it had life:
Oscula dat, reddique putat, sequiturque, tenetque
Et credit tactis digitos insidere membris,
Et metuit pressos veniat ne livor in artus. -- Ovid. Ibid. x. 256.
He kisses, and thinks kisses come again,
He sues, pursues, and holds, beleeves in vain
His fingers sinke where he does touch the place,
And feares least black and blew touched-lims deface.
Let a Philosopher be put in a cage made of small and thin-set iron wire, and hanged on
the top of our Ladies Church steeple in Paris; he shall, by evident reason, perceive that it

is impossible he should fall down out of it: yet can he not choose (except he have been
brought up to the trade of tilers or thatchers) but the sight of that exceeding height must
needs dazle his sight, and amaze or turn his senses. For we have much ado to warrant our
selves in the walks or battlements of a high tower or steeple, if they be hattlemented and
wrought with pillars, and somewhat wide one from another, although of stone and never
so strong. Nay, some there are that call scarcely think or hear of such heights. Let a
beame or planke be laid acrosse from one of those two steeples to the other, as big, as
thick, as strong, and as broad as would suffice any man to walke safely upon it, there is no
philosophicall wisdom of so great resolution and constancy that is able to encourage and
persuade us to march upon it, as we would were it below on the ground. I have sometimes
made trial of it upon our mountaines on this side of Italie, yet am I one of those that will
not easily be affrighted with such things, and I could not without horror to my mind and
trembling of legs and thighes endure to looke on those infinite precipices and steepy
down-fals, though I were not near the brim, nor any danger within my length and more;
and unless I had willingly gone to the perill, I could not possibly have falne. Where I also
noted that how deep soever the bottome were, if but a tree, a shrub, or any out-butting
crag of a rock presented itself unto our eyes upon those steepe and high Alpes, somewhat
to uphold the sight; and divide the same, it does somewhat ease and assure us from fear,
as if it were a thing which in our fall might either helpe or upheld us: and that we cannot
without some dread and giddinesse in the head so much as abide to looke upon one of
those even and down-right precipices: Vt despici sine vertigine simul oculorum animique
non possit:’So as they cannot looke down without giddinesse both of eyes and mindes:’
which is an evident deception of the sight. Therefore was it that a worthy Philosopher
pulled out his eyes that so he might discharge his soul of the seducing and diverting he
received by them, and the better and more freely apply himself unto Philosophy. But by
this accompt, he should also have stopped his ears, which (as Theophrastus said) are the
most dangerous instruments we have to receive violent and sodaine impressions to trouble
and alter us, and should in the end have deprived himself of all his other senses; that is to
say, both of his being and life. For they have the power to command our discourses and
sway our mind: Fit etiam sæpe specie quadam, sæpe vocum gravitate et cantibus, vt
pellantur animi vehementius: sæpe etiam cura et timore: (Cic. Divin. i.) It comes to pass
that many times our mindes are much moved with some shadow, many times with deep
sounding or singing of voices, many times with care and fear. Physitians hold that there
are certain complexions which by some sounds and instruments are agitated even unto
fury. I have seen some who, without infringing their patience, could not well hear a
bone gnawne under their table: and we see few men but are much troubled at that sharpe,
harsh, and teeth-edging noise that smiths make in filing of brasse, or scraping of iron and
steele together: others will be offended if they but hear one chew his meat somewhat
aloud; nay, some will be angrie with or hate a man that either speaks in the nose or rattles
in the throat. That piping prompter of Gracchus, who mollified, raised, and wound his
masters voice whilst he was making orations at Rome; what good did he if the motion and
quality of the sound had not the force to move and efficacy to alter the auditories
judgement: Verily there is great cause to make so much ado, and keep such a coyle about

the constancy and firmnesse of this goodly piece, which suffers itself to be handled,
changed, and turned by the motion and accident of so light a winde. The very same
cheating and cozening that senses bring to our understanding, themselves receive it in
their turnes. Our mind does likewise take revenge of it, they lie, they cog, and deceive one
another a vie. What we see and hear, being passionately transported by anger, we neither
see nor hear it as it is.
Et solem geminum, et duplices se ostendere Thebas. -- Virg. Æn. iv. 470.
That two Sunnes do appeare,
And double Thebes are there.
The object which we love seems much more fairer unto us then it is:
Multimodis igitur pravos turpesque videmus
Esse in delitiis, summoque in honore vigere: --Lucr. iv. 1147.
We there fore see that those, who many waies are bad,
And fowle, are yet belov’d, and in chief honor had;
and that much fowler which we loath. To a pensive and heart-grieved man a clear day
seems gloomie and duskie. Our senses are not only altered but many times dulled, by
the passions of the mind. How many things see we, which we perceive not, if our mind be
either busied or distracted elsewhere?
-----in rebus quoque apertis noscere possis,
Si non advertas animum, proinde esse, quasi omni
Tempore semotæ fuerint, longeque remotæ. -- Ibid. 808.
Ev’n in things manifest it may be seen,
If you marke not, they are, as they had been
At all times sever’d far, remooved cleane.
The soul seems to retire herself into the inmost parts, and ammuseth the senses
faculties: so that both the inward and outward parts of man are full of weaknes and
falshood. Those which have compared our life unto a dreame, have happily had more
reason so to do then they were aware. When we dreame, our soul liveth, worketh and
exerciseth all her faculties, even and as much as when it waketh; and if more softly and
obscurely, yet verily not so, as that it may admit so great a difference as there is betweene
a dark night and a clear day: indeed as betweene a night and a shadow: there it sleepeth, here
it slumbreth: more or less they are ever darknesses, indeed Cimmerian darknesses. We wake
sleeping, and sleep waking. In my sleep I see not so clear; yet can I never find my

waking clear enough, or without dimnesse. Sleepe also, in his deepest rest, does
sometimes bring dreames asleepe: but our waking is never so vigilant as it may clearely
purge and dissipate the ravings or idle phantasies which are the dreames of the waking,
and worse then dreames. Our reason and soul, receiving the phantasies and opinions,
which sleeping seize on them, and authorising our dreames actions, with like approbation,
as it does the days, why make we not a doubt whether our thinking and our working be
another dreaming, and our waking some kind of sleeping? If the senses be our first judges,
it is not ours that must only be called to counsell: for, in this facultie, beasts have as much
(or more) right as we. It is most certain that some have their hearing more sharpe than
man; others their sight; others their smelling; others their feeling, or taste. Democritus said
that Gods and beasts had the sensitive faculties much more perfect than man. Now,
betweene the effects of their senses and ours the difference is extreme. Our spettle
cleanseth and drieth our sores, and killeth serpents.
Tantaque in his rebus distantia differitasque est,
Ut quod alus cibus est, aliis fuat acre venenum.
Sæpe etenim serpens, hominis contacta saliva,
Disperit, ac sese mandendo conficit ipsa. -- Lucr. iv. 640.
There is such distance, and such difference in these things,
As what to one is meate, t’another poison brings.
For oft a Serpent touched with spettle of a man
Does die, and gnaw itself with fretting all he can.
What quality shall we give unto spettle, either according to us or according to the
serpent? by which two senses shall we verifie its true essence, which we seek for? Pliny
says that there are certain Seahares in India that to us are poison, and we bane to them;
so that we die if we but touch them; now whether is man or the Sea-hare poison? Whom
shall we believe, either the fish of man or the man of fish? Some quality of the air
infecteth man which nothing at all hurteth the one: some other the oxe, and not man:
which of the two is, either in truth or nature, the pestilent quality? Such as are troubled
with the yellow jandise deem all things they looke upon to be yellowish, which seem
more pale and wan to them then to us.
Lurida præterea fiunt quæcunque tuentur Arquati. -- Ibid. 333.
And all that jaundis’d men behold,
They yellow straight or palish hold.
Those which are sicke of the disease which phisitians call Hyposphagma, which is a
suffusion of blood under the skin, imagine that all things they see are bloody and red.
Those humors that so change the sights operation, what know we whether they are

predominant and ordinary in beasts? For we see some whose eyes are as yellow as theirs
that have the jandise, others that have them all blood-shotten with rednesse: it is likely that
the objects collour they looke upon seems otherwise to them then to us: which of the
two judgements shall be true? For it is not said that the essence of things has reference to
man alone. Hardnesse, whiteness, depth, and sharpnesse touch the service and concerne
the knowledge of beasts as well as ours: Nature has given the use of them to them as well
as to us. When we winke a little with our eye, we perceive the bodies we looke upon to
seem longer and outstretched. Many beasts have their eye as winking as we. This length
is then happily the true form of that body, and not that which our eyes give it, being in
their ordinary seate. If we close our eye above, things seem double unto us.
Bina lucernarum flo rentia lumina flammis
Et duplices hominum facies, et corpora bina. --Ibid. iii. 728.
The lights of candles double flaming then;
And faces twaine, and bodies twaine of men
If our ears chance to be hindred by any thing, or that the passage of our hearing be
stopt, we receive the sound otherwise then we were ordinarily wont. Such beasts as have
hairie ears, or that in lieu of an eare have but a little hole, do not by consequence hear
that we hear, and receive the sound other then it is. We see at solemn shewes or in
theatres that, opposing any collourd glasse betweene our eyes and the torches light,
whatsoever is in the roome seems or greene, or yellow, or red unto us, according to the
collour of the glasse:
Et vulgo faciunt id lutea russaque vela,
Et ferruginea, cum magnis intenta theatris
Per malos volgata trabesque trementia pendent,
Namque ibi consessum caveat subter, et omnem
Scenai speciem, patrum matrumque deorumque
Inficiunt coguntque suo fluitare colore. -- Ibid. 73.
And yellow, russet, rustic curtained work this feate
In common sights abroade, where over skaffold great
Stretched on masts, spred over beames, they hang still waving.
All the seates circuit there, and all the stages braving,
Of fathers, mothers, Gods, and all the circle showe
They double-dye and in their colours make to flowe.
It is likely that those beasts eyes which we see to be of diverse collours, produce the
apparances of those bodies they looke upon to be like their eyes. To judge the senses
operation, it were then necessary we were first agreed with beasts, and then betweene our

selves; which we are not, that ever-and-anon disputing about that one seeth, heareth, or
tasteth something to be other then indeed it is; and contend as much as about any thing
else, of the diversity of those images our senses report unto us. A yong child heareth,
seeth, and tasteth otherwise, by natures ordinary rule, then a man of thirty years; and he
otherwise then another of threescore. The senses are to some more obscure and dimme,
and to some more open and quick. We receive things differently, according as they are
and seem unto us. Things being then so uncertaine and full of controversie, it is no longer
a wonder if it be told us that we may avouch snow to seem white unto us; but to affirme
that it’s such in essence and in truth, we cannot warrant ourselves: which foundation being
so shaken, all the science in the world must necessarily go to wracke. What, do our
senses themselves hinder one another? To the sight a picture seems to be raised aloft,
and in the handling flat: shall we say that muske is so pleasing or no, which comforteth
our smelling and offendeth our taste? There are hearbs and ointments which to some parts
of the body are good, and to other some hurtful. Honie is pleasing to the taste, but
unpleasing to the sight. Those jewels wrought and fashioned like feathers or sprigs, which
in impreses are called feathers without ends, no eye can discerne the bredth of them, and
no man warrant himself from this deception, that on the one end or side it groweth not
broder and broder, sharper and sharper, and on the other more and more narrow,
especially being rouled about ones finger, when notwithstanding in handling it seems
equal in bredth, and every where likewise. Those who to encrease and aide their luxury were
anciently wont to use perspective or looking glasses, fit to make the object they
represented appeare very big and great, that so the members they were to use might, by
that ocular increase, please them the more: to whether of the two senses yielded they,
either to the sight presenting those members as big and great as they wisht them, or to the
feeling that presented them little and to be disdained? Is it our senses that lend these
diverse conditions unto subjects, when for all that the subjects have but one? as we see in
the Bread we eat: it is but Bread, but one using it, it maketh bones, blood, flesh, hair, and
nailes thereof:
Ut cibus in membra atque artus cum diditur omnes
Disperit, atque aliam naturam sufficit ex se. -- Ibid. iii. 728.
As meate distributed into the members, dies,
Another nature yet it perishing supplies.
The moistnesse which the roote of a tree suckes becomes a trunke, a leafe, and fruite: And
the aire being but one, applied unto a trumpet, becommoth diverse in a thousand sorts of
sounds. Is it our senses (say I) who likewise fashion of diverse qualities those subjects, or
whether they have them so and such? And upon this doubt, what may we conclude of
their true essence? Moreover, since the accidents of sicknesse, of madnesse, or of sleepe,
make things appeare other unto us then they seem un to the healthy, unto the wise, and to
the waking: is it not likely that our right seate and natural humors have also wherewith to
give a being unto things, having reference unto their condition, and to appropriate them to

itself, as do inordinate humors; and our health as capable to give them his visage as
sicknesse? Why has not the temperate man some form of the objects relative unto
himself as the intemperate: and shall not he likewise imprint his character in them? The
distasted impute wallowishnes unto wine: the healthier good taste; and the thirsty,
brisknesse, rellish, and dellicacie. Now our condition appropriating things unto itself,
and transforming them to its own humor: we know no more how things are in sooth
and truth; for nothing comes unto us but falsified and altered by our senses. Where the
compasses, the quadrant, or the ruler are crooked, all proportions drawne by them, and all
the buildings erected by their measure, are also necessarily defective and imperf ect. The
uncertaintie of our senses yields what ever they produce, also uncertaine.
Denique ut in fabrica, si prava est regula prima,
Normaque si fallax rectis regionibus exit,
Et libella aliqua si ex parte claudicat hilum,
Omnia mendose fieri, atque obstipa necessum
Prava, cubantia, prona, supina, atque absona tecta,
Iam ruere ut quædam videantur velle, ruantque
Prodita judiciis fallacibus omnia primis.
Hic igitur ratio tibi rerum prava necesse est,
Falsaque sit falsis quæcunque a sensibus orta est. -- Ibid. iv. 514.
As in building if the first rule be to blame,
And the deceitful squire erre from right forms and frame,
If any instrument want any jot of weight,
All must needs faultie be, and stooping in their height,
The building naught, absurd, upward and downeward bended,
As if they meant to fall, and fall, as they intended;
And all this as betrayde
By judgements formost laid.
Of things the reason therefore needs must faultie be
And false, which from false senses draws its pedigree.
As for the rest, who shall be a competent Judge in these differences? As we said in
controversies of religion, that we must have a judge inclined to either party, and free from
partialitie, or affection, which is hardly to be had among Christians; so happens it in this:
For if he be old he cannot judge of ages sense, himself being a party in this controversie:
and so if he be yong, healthy, sicke, sleeping, or waking, it is all one: We had need of
some body void and exempted from all these qualities, that without any preoccupation of
judgement might judge of these propositions as indifferent unto him: by which accompt
we should have a judge that were no man. To judge of the apparances that we receive of
subjects, we had need have a judicatorie instrument: to verifie this instrument we should
have demonstration; and to approve demonstration, an instrument; thus are we ever
turning round. Since the senses cannot determine our disputation, themselves being so full

of uncertainty, it must then be reason: and no reason can be astiblished without another
reason: then are we ever going backe unto infinity. Our phantasie does not apply itself to
strange things, but is rather conceived by the interposition of senses; and senses cannot
comprehend a strange subject; nay, not so much as their own passions: and so, nor the
phantasie, nor the apparence is the subject’s, but rathier the passion’s only, and sufferance
of the sense: which passion and subject are diverse things: Therefore, who judgeth by
apparences, judgeth by a thing different from the subject. And to say that the senses’
passions refer the quality of strange subjects by resemblance unto the soul: How can
the soul and the understanding rest assured of that resemblance, having of itself no
commerce with forraigne subjects? Even as he that knowes not Socrates, seeing his
picture, cannot say that it resembleth him. And would a man judge by apparences, be it by
all it is impossible; for by their contraries and differences they hinder one another, as we
see by experience. May it be that some choice apparences rule and direct the others? This
choice must be verified by another choice, the second by a third: and so shal we never
make an end. In few, there is no constant existence, neither of our being, nor of the
objects. And we and our judgement and all mortal things else do uncessantly rowle, turns
and pass away. Thus can nothing be certainely established, nor of the one nor of the
other; both the judgeing and the judged being in continuall alteration and motion. We have
no communication with being; for every humane nature is ever in the middle betwee ne
being borne and dying; giving nothing of itself but an obscure apparence and shadow,
and an uncertaine and weake opinion. And if perhaps you fix your thought to take its
being, it would be even as if one should go about to graspe the water: for, how much the
more he shal close and press that which by its own nature is ever gliding, so much the
more he shall loose what he would hold and fasten. Thus, seeing all things are subject to
pass from one change to another, reason, which therein seeketh a reall subsistence, findes
herself deceived as unable to apprehend any thing subsistent and permanent: forasmuch
as each thing either commeth to a being, and is not yet altogether: or beginneth to dy
before it be borne. Plato said that bodies had never an existence but indeed a birth,
supposing that Homer made the Ocean Father, and Thetis Mother of the Gods, thereby to
show us that all things are in continuall motion, change and variat ion. As he sayeth, a
common opinion amongst all the Philosophers before his time, only Parmenides excepted,
who denied any motion to be in things of whose power he maketh no small accompt.
Pythagoras that each thing or matter was ever gliding and labile. The Stoics affirme
there is no present time, and that which we call present is but conjoyning and assembling
of future time and past. Heraclitus avereth that no man ever entered twice one same river;
Epicharmus avoucheth that who ere while borrowed any money does not now owe it; and
that he who yesternight was bidden to dinner this day, commeth to day unbidden: since
they are no more themselves, but are become others; and that one mortal substance could
not twise be found in one self estate: for by the sodainesse and lightness of change
sometimes it wasteth, and other times it assembleth; now it comes and now it goes; in
some sort, that he who beginneth to be borne never comes to the perfection of being. For,
this being borne commeth never to an end, nor ever stayeth as being at an end; but after
the seed proceedeth continually in change and alteration from one to another. As of mans

seed there is first made a shapelesse fruit in the Mothers Wombe, then a shapen Childe,
then being out of the Wombe, a sucking babe, afterward he becometh a ladde, then
consequently a stripling, then a full grown man, then an old man, and in the end an aged
decrepite man. So that age and subsequent generation goeth ever undoing and wasting the
precedent.
Mutat enim mundi naturam totius ætas,
Ex alioque alius status excipere omnia debet,
Nec manet vlla sui similis res, omnia migrant,
Omnia commutat natura et vertere cogit. -- Ibid. v. 837.
Of th’universall world, age does the nature change,
And all things from one state must to another range,
No one thing like itself remaines, all things do pass,
Nature does change, and drive to change, each thing that was.
And then we do foolishly fear a kind of death, whenas we have already past and dayly
pass to many others; for, not only (as Heraclitus said) the death of fire is a generation of
air: and the death of air a generation of water: but also we may most evidently see it in
ourselves. The flower of age dieth, fadeth and fleeteth, when age comes upon us, and
youth endeth in the flower of a full grown mans age: childhood in youth and the first age
dieth in infancie: and yesterday endeth in this day, and to day shall die in to morrow. And
nothing remaineth or ever continueth in one state. For to prove it, if we should ever
continue one and the same, how is it then that now we rejoice at one thing, and now at
another? How comes it to pass we love things contrary, or we bath them, or we love
them, or we blame them? How is it that we have different affections holding no more the
same sense in the same thought? For it is not likely that without alteration we should take
other passions, and what admitteth alterations continueth not the same; and if it be not
one self same, then it is not: but rather with being all one, the simple being does also
change, ever becoming other from other. And by consequence Natures senses are
deceived and lie falsly; taking what appeareth for what is, for want of truly knowing what
it is that is. But then what is it that is indeed? That which is eternall, that is to say, that
which ne ver had birth, nor ever shall have end; and to which no time can bring change or
cause alteration. For time is a fleeting thing, and which appeareth as in a shadow, with the
matter ever gliding, alwaies fluent without ever being stable or permanent; to whom
rightly belong these termes, Before and After, and it Hath been, or Shall be. Which at
first sight does manifestly show that it is not a thing which is: for it were great sottishnesse
and apparent falsehood, to say that that is which is not yet in being, or that already has
ceased from being. And concerning these words, Present, Instant, Even now, by which it
seems that especially we uphold and principally ground the intelligence of time; reason
discovering the same does forthwith destroy it: for presently it severeth it asunder and
divideth it into future and past times as willing to see it necessarily parted in two. As
much happens unto nature which is measured according unto time, which measureth her:

for no more is there any thing in her that remaineth or is subsistent; rather all things in her
are either borne or ready to be borne or dying. By means whereof it were a sinne to say of
God, who is the only that is, that he was or shall be: for these words are declinations,
passages, or vicissitudes of that which cannot last nor continue in being. Wherefore we
must conclude, that only God is, not according to any measure of time, but according to
an immoveable and immutable eternity, not measured by time nor subject to any
declination, before whom nothing is, nor nothing shall be after, nor more new nor more
recent, but one really being: which by one only Now or Present, filleth the Ever, and
there is nothing that truly is but he alone: without saying he has bin or he shall be, without
beginning and sans ending. To this so religious conclusion of a heathen man I will only
add this word, taken from a testimony of the same condition, for an end of this long and
tedious discourse, which might well furnish me with endlesse matter. ’Oh, what a vile and
abject thing is man (says he) unless he raise himself above humanity!’ Observe here a
notable speech and a profitable desire; but likewise absurd. For to make the handfull
greater than the hand, and the embraced greater than the arm, and to hope to straddle
more than our legs length, is impossible and monstrous: nor that man should mount over
and above himself or humanity; for he cannot see but with his own eyes, nor take hold
but with his own arms. He shall raise himself up, if it please God to lend him his
helping hand. He may elevate himself by forsaking and renouncing his own means,
and suffering himself to be elevated and raised by meere heavenly means. It is for our
Christian faith, not for his Stoice virtue, to pretend or aspire to this divine
Metamorphosis, or miraculous transmutation.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XIII: OF JUDGING OF OTHERS’ DEATH






CHAPTER XIII: OF JUDGING OF OTHERS’ DEATH
HEN WE judge of others assurance or boldness in death, which
without all perhaps is the most remarkeable action of humane life,
great heed is to be taken of one thing, which is, that a man will hardly
believe he is come to that point. Few men die with a resolution that it
is their last hour: and nowhere does hopes deceit ammuse us more.
She never ceaseth to ring in our ears that others have been sicker and
yet have not died: the cause is not so desperate as it is taken; and if the
worst happen, God has done greater wonders. The reason is, that we make too much
account of ourselves, It seems that the generality of things does in some sort suffer for
our annullation and takes compassion of our state. Forasmuch as our sight, being altered,
represents unto itself things likewise; and we imagine that things faile it as it does to them:
As they who travell by sea, to whom mountaines, fields, townes, heaven and earth, seem
to go the same motion, and keep the same course they do:
Provehimur portu, terræque vrbesque recedunt. -- Virg. Æn. iii. 72.

We sayling launch from harbour, and
Behinde our backes leave townes, leave land.
Who ever saw old age that commended not times past, and blamed not the present,
charging the world and mens customs with her misery and lowring discontent?
Iamque caput quassans grandis suspirat arator,
Et cum tempora temporibus prmsentia confert
Præteritis, laudat fortitnas sæpe parentis
Et crepat antiquum genus ut pietas repletum. -- Lucr. ii. 113.
The gray-beard Plow-man sighes, shaking his hoarie head,
Compares times that are now with times past heretofore.
Praises the fortunes of his father long since dead,
And crackes of ancient men, whose honesty was more.
We entertaine and carry all with us: Whence it followeth that we deem our death to be
some great ma tter, and which passeth not so easily, nor without a solemn consultation of
the Starres; Tot circa unum caput tumultuantes Deos: ’So many Gods keeping a stir
about one mans life.’ And so much the more we think it, by how much the more we
praise ourselves. What? should so much learning and knowledge be lost with so great
dammage, without the Destinies particular care? A soul so rare and exemplar, costs it no
more to be killed than a popular and unprofitable soul? This life that covereth so many
others, of whom so many other lives depend, that for his use possesseth so great a part of
the world and filleth so many places, is it displaced as that which holdeth by its own
simple string? No man of us thinkes it sufficient to be but one. Thence came those words
of Cæsar to his pilot, more proudly swolne than the sea that threatned him:
------Italiam si, cælo authore, recusas,
Me pete: sola tibi causa hæc est iusta timoris,
Vectorem non nosse tuum; perrumpe procellas
Tutem secure mei. -- Lucan. iii. 579.
If Italie you do refuse with heaven your guide,
Turn you to me: to you only just cause of fear
Is that your passenger you know’st not: stormie tide
Breake through, secure by guard of me, whom you do bear.
And these:
-----credit jam digna pericula Cæsar

Fatis esse suis: tantusque evertere (dixi)
Me superis labor est, parvi quem puppe sedentem.
Tam magno petiere mari. -- Ibid. 653.
Cæsar does now believe those dangers worthie are
Of his set fate; and saies, do Gods take so much pain
Me to undoe, whom they thus to assault prepare
Set in so small a skiffe, in such a surging main?
And this common foppery that Phoebus for one whole yeare bare mourning weedes on
his forehead for the death of him:
Ille etiam extincto miseratus Cæsare Romam,
Cum caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit. -- Virg. Geor. i. 466.
The Sunne did pity take of Rome when Cæsar dide,
When he his radiant head in obscure rust did hide.
And a thousand such wherewith the world suffers itself to be so easily conicatcht,
deeming that our own interests disturbe heaven, and his infinitie is moved at our least
actions. Non tanta cælo societas nobiscum est, ut nostro fato mortalis sit il le quoque
siderum fulgar: (Plin. nat. hist. ii. c. 8.) ’There is no such societie betweene heaven and us,
that by our destinie the shining of the starres should be mortal as we are.’ And to judge a
resolution and constancy in him, who though he be in manifest danger, does not yet
believe it, it is no reason; and it sufficeth not that he die in that ward, unless he have
directly and for that purpose put himself into it: it happens that most men set a stern
countenance on the matter, looke big, and speak stoutly, there by to acquire reputation,
which, if they chance to live, they hope to enjoy. Of all I have seen die, fortune has
disposed their countenances, but not their desseignes. And of those which in ancient times
have put themselves to death, the choice is great, whether it were a sodaine death or a
death having time and leisure. That cruel Roman Emperor said of his prisoners that he
would make them feel death; and if any fortuned to kill himself in prison, that fellow
had escaped me (would he say). He would extend and linger death, and cause it be felt by
torments.
Vidimus et toto quamvis in corpore cæso,
Nil anima, lethale datum, moremque nefanda,
Durum sævitiæ, pereuntis parcere morti. -- Lucan. ii. 179.
And we have seen, when all the body tortur’d lay,
Yet no stroke deadly giv’n, and that in humane way
Of tyranny, to spare his death that sought to die.

Verily, it is not so great a matter, being in perfect health and well setled in mind, for one
to resolve to kill himself: It is an easy thing to show stoutness and play the wag before
one come to the pinch. So that Heliogabalus, the most dissolute man of the world, amidst
his most riotous sensualities, intended, whensoever occasion should force him to it, to
have a daintie death. Which, that it might not degenerate from the rest of his life, he had
purposely caused a stately towre to be built, the nether part and forecourt whereof was
floored with boards richly set and enchased with gold and precious stones, from off which
he might headlong throw himself down: He had also caused cordes to be made of gold
and crimson silke, therewith to strangle himself; and a rich golden rapier to thrust
himself through, and kept poison in boxes of Emeraldes and Topases, to poison himself
with, according to the humor he might have, to chuse which of these deaths should please
him.
Impiger et fortis virtute coacta. -- iv. 797. Gurio.
A ready minded gallant,
And in forst vallour valiant.
Notwithstanding, touching this man, the wantonnesse of his preparation makes it more
likely that he would have fainted had he been put to his trial. But even of those who
most undantedly have resolved themselves to the execution, we must consider (I say)
whether it were with a life ending stroke, and that took away any leisure to feel the
effect thereof. For it is hard to guesse seeing life droope away little by little, the bodies-
feeling entermingling itself with the soules, means of repentance being offered,
whether in so dangerous an intent, constancy or obstancie were found in him. In Cæsars
civill wars, Lucius Dominus taken in Prussia, having empoysoned himself, did
afterwards rue and repent his deede. It has hapned in our days that some having resolved
to die, and at first not stricken deepe enough, the smarting of his flesh, thrusting his arm
backe, twice or thrice more wounded himself, anew, and yet could never stricke
sufficiently deepe. Whilst the arraignment of Plantius Silvanus was preparing, Vrgulania,
his grandfather, sent him a poignard, wherewith, not able to kill himself thoroughly, he
caused his own servants to cut his veines. Albucilla, in Tiberius time, purposing to kill
herself, but striking over faintly, gave her enemies leisure to apprehend and imprison her,
and appoint her what death they pleased. So did Captain Demosthenes after his
discomfiture in Sicilie. And C. Fimbria having over-feeblie wounded himself, became a
sutor to his boy to make an end of him. On the other side, Ostorius, who forasmuch as he
could not use his own arm, disdained to employ his servants in any other thing but to
hold his dagger stiffe and strongly; and taking his running, himself carried his throate to
its point, and so was thrust through. To say truth, it is a meate a man must swallow
without chewing, unless his throat be frostshod. And therefore Adrianus the emperour
made his Physitian to marke and take the just compasse of the mortal place about his pap,
that so his aime might not faile him, to whom he had given charge to kill him. See why

Cæsar being demanded, which was the death he most allowed, answered, ’The least
premeditated, and the shortest.’ If Cæsar said it, it is no faintness in me to believe it. A
short death (says Plinie) is the chief happe of humane life. It grieveth them to
acknowledge it. No man can be said to be resolved to die that feareth to purchase it, and
that cannot abide to looke upon and out-stare it with open eyes. Those which in times of
execution are seen to run to their end, and hasten the execution, do it not with
resolution, but because they will take away time to consider the same; it grieves them not
to be dead, but to die.
Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum, nihil æstimo. -- Cic. Tusc. Qu. i Epicha.
I would not die too soone,
But care not, when ’tis done.
It is a degree of constancy unto which I have experienced to arive, as those that cast
themselves into danger, or into the sea, with closed eyes. In mine opinion there is nothing
more worthy the noting in Socrates life, then to have had thirty whole days to ruminate
his deaths decree, to have digested it all that while, with an assured hope, without dismay
or alteration, and with a course of actions and words rather supprest, and loose-hanging,
then out-stretched and raised by the weight of such a cogitation. That Pomponius Atticus,
to whom Cicero writeth, being sicke, caused Agrippa, his son in lawe, and two or three
of his other friends, to be called for, to whom he said, that having assaid how he got
nothing in going about to be cured, and what he did to prolong his life did also lengthen
and augment his grief, he was now determined to make an end of one and other;
intreating them to allow of his determination, and that by no means they would lose their
labor to diswade him from it. And having chosen to end his life by abstinence, his
sicknesse was cured by accident. The remedy he had employed to make himself away
brought him to health again. The Physitians and his friends, glad of so happy a success
and rejoycing thereof with him, were in the end greatly deceived; for, with all they could
do, they were never able to make him alter his former opinions saying that as he must one
day pass that careire, and being now so forward, he would remove the care another time
to beginne again. This man having with great leisure apprehended death, is not only no
whit discouraged when he comes to front it, but resolutely falls upon it for being satisfied
of that for which he was entered the combate, in a braverie he thrust himself into it, to see
the end of it. It is far from fearing death to go about to taste and savour the same. The
historie of Cleanthes, the Philosopher, is much like to this. His gummes being swolne, his
Physitians persuaded him to use great abstinence. Having fasted two days, he was so well
amended, as they told him he was well, and might return to his wonted course of life. He
contrarily having already tasted some sweetnes in this Painting, resolveth not to drawe
back, but to finish what he had so well begunne, and was so far waded into. Tullius
Marcellinus, a yong Roman gentleman, willing to prevent the hour of his destiny, to
ridde himself of a disease which tormented him more than he would endure, although
Physitians promised certainely to cure him, howbeit not sodainely: called his friends unto

him to determine about it: some (says Seneca) gave him that counsell, which for
weaknesse of heart themselves would have taken; others for flatteries that which they
imagined would be most pleasing unto him but a certain Stoike standing by, said thus unto
him: ’Toile not your self, Marcellinus, as if you determinedst some weightie matter: to live
is no such great thing, your base groomes and bruit beasts live also, but it is a matter of
consequence to die honestly, wisely and constantly. Remember how long it is; you doest
one same thing, to eate, to drinke, and sleepe; to drinke, to sleepe, to eate. We are ever
uncessantly wheeling in this endlesse circle. Not only bad and intolerable accidents, but
the very satiety to live, brings a desire of death.’ Marcellinus had no need of a man to
counsell, but of one to helpe him: his servants were afraid to meddle with him; but this
Philosopher made them to understand that familiars are suspected only when the question
is, whether the maisters death has been voluntary: otherwise it would be as bad an
example to hinder him as to kill him, forasmuch as,
Inuitum qui servat, idemfacit occidenti. -- Hor. Art. Poet. 467.
Who saves a man against his will
Does ev’n as much as he should kill.
Then he advertised Marcellinus, that it would not be unseemely, as fruit or comfets at
our tables, when our bellies be full, are given unto bystanders, so, the life ended, to
distribute something to such as have been the ministers of it. Marcellinus being of a
frank and liberal disposition, caused certain summes of mony to be divided amongst his
servants, and comforted them. And for the rest there needed neither yron nor blood; he
undertook to departe from this life, not by running from it: not to escape from death, but
to taste it. And to have leisure to conditione or bargaine with death having quit all manner
of nourishment, the third day ensuing, after he had caused himself to be sprinkled over
with luke-warme water, by little and little he consumed away; and (as he said) not without
some voluptuousness and pleasure. Verily, such as have had these faintings and
swownings of the heart, which proceed from weaknesses say that they feel no pain at all
in them, but rather some pleasure, as of a passage to sleepe and rest. These are
premeditated and digested deaths. But that Cato alone, may serve to all examples of
virtue, it seems his good destiny caused that hand wherewith he gave himself the fatall
blow to be sicke and sore: that so be might have leisure to affront death and to embrace
it, reenforcing his courage in that danger in lieu of mollifieing the same. And should I
have represented him in his proudest state, it should have been all bloody-gored, tearing
his entraile, and rending his gutts, rather then with a sword in his hand, as did the
statuaries of his time. For this second murther, was much more furious then the first.




Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XIV: HOW THAT OUR SPIRIT HINDERETH ITSELFE






CHAPTER XIV: HOW THAT OUR SPIRIT HINDERETH ITSELFE
T IS a pleasant imagination to conceive a spirit iustly ballanced
betweene two equall desires. For, it is not to be doubted, that he shall
never be reso lved upon any match: forasmuch as the application and
choise brings all the inequality of prise: And who should place us
betweene a bottle of wine and a gammon of bacon, with an equall
appetite to eat and drinke, doubtlesse there were noe remedy, but to die
of thirst and of hunger. To provide against this inconvenient, when the Stoics were
demanded whence the election of two indifferent things commeth into our soul (and
which causeth that from out a great number of Crownes or Angells we rather take one
then another, when there is no reason to induce us to prefer any one before others) they
answer, that this motion of the soul is extraorainarie and irregular coming into us by a
strange, accidentall and casual impulsion. In my opinion, it might rather be said that
nothing is presented unto us, wherein there is not some difference, how light so ever it
be: And that either to the sight, or to the feeling, there is ever some choice, which
tempteth and draws us to it, though imperceptib e and not to be distinguished. In like
manner, he that shall presuppose a twine-thrid equally strong all through, it is impossible
by all possibility that it should break, for, where would you have the flaw or breaking to

beginne? And at once to break in all places together is not in nature. The Geometricall
propositions which, by the certainty of their demonstrations, conclude the contained
greater then the containing, and the centre as great as his circumference; and that find
two lines uncessantly approaching one unto another, which yet can never meete and join
together; and the Philosophers stone, and quadrature of the circle, where the reason and
the effects are so opposite: might perhaps draw thence some argument to salve and
helpe this bold speech of Plinie: Solum certum, nihil esse certi, et homine nihil miserius
aut superbius: (1 PLIN. Nat. Hist. 1. ii. 7.) ’This only is sure, that there is nothing sure;
and nothing more miserable, and yet more arrogant then man.’



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XV: THAT OUR DESIRES ARE ENCREASED BY DIFFICULTIE






CHAPTER XV: THAT OUR DESIRES ARE ENCREASED BY DIFFICULTIE
HERE is no reason but has another contrary unto it, says the wisest
party of Philosophers. I did erewhile ruminate upon this notable saying,
which an ancient writer alleageth for the contempt of life. No good can
bring us any pleasure, except that against whole loss we are prepared:
In æquo est, dolor amissæ rei, et timor amittendæ:’(Sen. Epist. xcviii.)
’Sorrow for a thing lost, and fear of losing it, are on an even ground.’
Meaning to gain thereby, that the fruition of life cannot perfectly be
pleasing unto us, if we stand in any fear to lose it. A man might nevertheless say on the
contrary part, that we embrace and claspe this good so much the harder, and with more
affection, as we perceive it to be less sure, and fear it should be taken from us. For, it is
manifestly found, that as fire is rouzed up by the assistance of cold, even so our will is
whetted on by that which does resist it.
Si nunquam Danæn habuisset ahenea turis,
Non esset Danæ de Iove facta parens --Ovid. Am ii. El. xix. 27.

If Danæ had not been clos’d in brazen Tower,
Jove had not closed with Danæ in golden shower,
And that there is nothing so naturally opposite to our taste as satiety, which comes from
ease and facility, nor nothing that so much sharpneth it as rarenesse and difficulty.
Omnium rerum voluptas ipso quo debet fugare periculo crescit: ’The delight of all things
encreaseth by the danger, whereby it rather should terrify them that affect it.’
Galla nega; satiatur amor, nisi gaudia torquent. -- Mart. iv. Epig. xxxviii. i.
Good wench, deny, my love is cloied,
Unless joyes grieve, before enjoyed.
To keep love in breath and longing, Lycurgus ordained that the maried men of
Lacedemonia might never converse with their wives but by stealth, and that it should be as
great an imputation and shame to find them laide together, as if they were found living
with others. The difficulty of assignations or matches appointed, the danger of being
surprised, and the shame of ensuing to-morrow,
------- et languor, et silentium, Et latere petitus imo spiritus. --Hor. Epo. xi.
13.
And whispering voice, and languishment,
And breath in sighes from deepe sides sent.
are the things that give relish and tartnesse to the sawce. How many most lasciviously-
pleasant sports proceed from modest and shamefast manner of speech, of the daliances
and workes of love? Even voluptuousness seekes to provoke and stir itself up by
smarting. It is much sweeter when it itcheth, and endeared when it gauleth. The curtezan
Flora was wont to say that she never lay with Pompey but she made him carry away the
markes of her teeth.
Quod petiere premunt arcte, faciuntque dolorem
Corpore, et dentes inlidant sæpe labellis:
Et stimuli subsunt, qui instigant lædere id ipsum
Quodcumgue est, rabies unde illi germina surgunt, --Lucr. iv. 1070.
So goes it every where: rarenesse and difficulty gives esteeme unto things. Those of
Marca d’Ancona, in Italy, make their vows, and go on pilgrimage rather unto Iames in
Galicia, and those of Galicia rather unto our Lady of Loreto. In the country of Liege they
make more account of the Bathes of Luca; and they of Tuscany esteeme the Baths of
Spawe more than their own. In Rome the Fence-schooles are ever full of Frenchmen,

when few Romans come unto them. Great Cato, as well as any else, was even cloied and
distasted with his wife so long as she was his own, but when another mans, then wished
he for her, and would faine have lickt his fingers at her. I have heretofore put forth an old
stalion to soile, who before did no sooner see or smell a mare but was so lusty that no man
could rule him, nor no ground hold him; ease and facilitie to come to his own when he
list, has presently quailed his stomacke, and so cloyed him that he is weary of them. But
toward strange mares, and the first that passeth by his pasture, there is no hoe with him,
but suddenly he returnes to his old wonted neighings and furious heate. Our appetite does
contemne and pass over what he has in his free choice and own possession, to run
after and pursue what he has not.
Transvolat in medio posita, et fugientia captat. -- Hor. Ser. i. Sat. ii. 107
It over flies what open lies,
Pursuing only that which flies.
To forbid us anything is the ready way to make us long for it.
-----nisi tu servare puellam
Incipis, incipiet desinere ese mea. -- Ovid. Am. ii. El. xix. 47.
If you begin not your wench to enshrine,
She will begin to leave off to be mine.
And to leave it altogether to our will is but to breede dislike and contempt in us. So that to
want and to have store breedeth one self same inconvenience.
Tibi quod super est, mihi quod desit, dolet. -- Ter. Phor. act. i.sc. 3.
You grieve because you have too much
It griev’s me that I have none such.
Wishing and enjoying trouble us both likewise. The rigor of a mistris is
yrkesome, but ease and facility (to say true) much more; forasmuch as
discontent and vexation proceed of the estimation we have of the thing
desired, which sharpen love and set it afire. Whereas satiety begets distaste:
it is a dull, blunt, weary, and drouzy passion.
Si qua volet regnare diu, contemnat amantem. --Ovid. Am. ii. El. xix. 33.
If any list long to bear sway,
Scorne she her lover, ere she play.
-----contemnite amantes,

Sic hodie veniet, si qua negavit heri. -- Prop. ii. El. xiv. 19.
Lovers your lovers scorne, contemne, delude, deride
So will she come to-day, that yesterday denied.
Why did Poppea devise to maske the beauties of her face, but to endear them to her
lovers? Why are those beauties vailed down to the heels, which all desire to show,
which all wish to see? Why do they cover with so many lets, one over another, those
parts where chiefly consisteth our pleasure and theirs? And to what purpose serve those
baricadoes and verdugalles wherewith our women arm their flankes, but to allure our
appetite, and enveagle us to them by putting us off?
Et fugit ad salices, et se cupit ante videri. -- Virg. Buco. Ecl. iii. 65.
She to the willows runs to hide,
Yet gladly would she first be spide,
Interdum tunica duxit operta moram. -- Pro. ibid. Eleg. xv. 6.
She cover’d with her cote in play,
Did sometime make a short delay.
Whereto serves this mayden-like bashfulness, this willfull quaintness, this severe
countenance, this seeming ignorance of those things which they know better than our
selves, that go about to instruct them, but to increase a desire and endeare a longing in us
to vanquish, to gourmandize, and at our pleasure to dispose all this squeamish ceremony,
and all these peevish obstacles? For, it is not only a delight but a glory to besot and
debauch this dainty and nice sweetness, and this infantine bashfullnesse, and to subject a
marble and stern gravity to the mercy of our flame. It is a glory (say they) to triumph
over modesty, chastity and temperance: and who disswadeth ladies from these parts,
betraieth both them and himself. It is to be supposed that their heart yerneth for fear,
that the sound of our wordes woundeth the purity of their ears, for which they hate us,
and with a forced constraint agree to withstand our importunitie. Beauty with all her might
has not wherewith to give a taste of herself without these interpositions. See in Italie,
where most, and of the finest beauty is to be sold, how it is forced to seek other strange
means, and suttle devices, arts and tricks, to yield herself pleasing and acceptable: and
yet in good sooth, do what it can, being venal and common, it remaineth feeble, and even
languishing. Even as in virtue of two equall effects, we hold that the fairest and worthiest,
wherein are proposed more lets, and which affordeth greater hazards. It is an effect of
Gods providence, to suffer his holy Church to be vexed and turmoyled as we see with so
many troubles and stormes, to rouze and awaken by this opposition and strife the godly
and religious soules, and raise them from out a lethall security and stupified slumber,

wherein so long tranquility had plunged them. If we shall counterpoize the loss we have
had by the number of those that have strayed out of the right way, and the profit that
acrueth unto us, by having taken hart of grace, and by reason of combate raised our zeale
and forces; I wot not whether the profit does surmount the loss. We thought to tie the
bond of our marriages the faster by removing all means to dissolve them, but by how
much faster that of constraint has bin tried, so much more has that of our will and
affection bin slacked and loosed: Whereas, on the contrary side, that which so long time
held mariages in honor and safety in Rome, was the liberty to break them who list. They
kept their wives the better, forasmuch as they might leave them; and when divorces might
freely be had, there past five hundred years and more before any would ever make use of
them.
Quod licet, ingratum est, quod non licet, acrius urit. -- Ovid. Am. ii. El.xix.
3.
What we may do, does little please:
It woormes us more, that has less ease.
To this purpose might the opinion of an ancient writer be adjoined, that torments do
rather encourage vices than suppress them; that they beget not a care of well-doing, which
is the work of reason and discipline, but only a care not to be surprised in doing evil.
Latius excisæ pestis contagia serpunt.
Th’ infection of the plague nigh spent
And rooted out, yet further went.
I wot not whether it be true, but this I know by experience that policy was never found
to be reformed that way. The order and regiment of maners dependeth of some ther
meane. The Greeke stories make mention of the Agrippians neighbouring upon Scithia,
who live without any rod or staffe of offence, where not only no man undertakes to
buckle with any other man but whosoever can but save himself, there (by reason of their
virtue and sanctity of life) is as it were in a Sanctuary: And no man dares so much as to
touch him. Many have recourse to them, to attone and take up quarrels and differences,
which arise amongst men else where. There is a nation where the enclosure of gardens and
fields they intend keep severall, are made with a seely twine of cotton, which amongst
them is found to be more safe and fast than are our ditches and hedges. Furem signata
sollicitant, Aperta ffractarius præterit (Sen. Epist. lxix). ’Things sealed up solicite a thief
to break them open: Whereas a common burglayer will pass by quietly things that lie
open.’ Amongst other means, ease and facility does perhaps cover and fence my house from
the violence of civill wares: Inclosure and fencing drawe on the enterprise, and distrust,
the offence. I have abated and weakened the soldiers designe by taking hazard and all

means of military glory from their exploite, which is wont to serve them, for a title, and
stead them for an excuse. What is performed courageously, at what time justice lieth dead,
and law has not her due course, is ever done honourably. I yield them the conquest of my
house dastardly and treacherous. It is never shut to any that knocketh. It has no other
guardian or Provision but a porter, as an ancient custom, and used ceremony, who
serveth not so much to defend my gate as to offer it more decently and courteously to all
comers. I have nor watch nor sentinell but what the starres keep for me. That gentleman
is much to blame who makes a show to stand upon his guards, except he be very strong
indeed. Who so is open on one side is so every where. Our fore-fathers never dreamed on
building of frontire townes and castles. The means to assaile (I meane without battery
and troopes of armed men) and to surprise our houses, encrease daily beyond the means
of garding or defending. Mens wits are generally exasperated and whetted on that way. An
invasion concerneth all, the defense none but the rich. Mine was sufficiently strong,
according to the times when it was made. I have since added nothing unto it that way; and
I would fear the strength of it should turn against my self. Seeing a peaceable time will
require we shall unfortifie them. It is dangerous not to be able to recover them again, and
it is hard for one to be assured of them. For concerning intestine broils, your own servant
may be of that faction you stand in fear of. And where religion serveth for a pretence,
even alliances and consanguinitie become mistrustful under colour of justice. Common
rents cannot entertaine our private garrisons. They should all be consumed. We have not
wherewith, nor are we able to do it without our apparent ruine, or more
incommodiously and therewithall injuriously without the common peoples destruction.
The state of my loss should not be much worse. And if you chance to be a looser, your
own friends are readier to accuse your improvidence and unhedinesse than to moan you,
and excuse your ignorance and careles enesse concerning the offices belonging to your
profession. That so many strongly-garded houses have been lost, whereass mine
continueth still, makes me suspect they were overthrowne only because they were so
diligently garded. It is that which affoordeth a desire and ministreth a pretence to the
assailant. All gards bear a show of war, which if God be so pleased may light upon me.
But so it is, I will never call for it. It is my sanctuary or retreate to rest my self from
wars. I endeavour to free this corner from the public storme, as I do another corner in
my soul. Our war may change form and multiply and diversifie how and as long as it
list, but for my self I never stir. Amongst so many barricaded and armed houses, none
but my self (as far as I know) of my quality has merely trusted the protection of his
unto the heavens: for I never removed neither plate, nor hangings, nor my evidences. I
will neither fear nor save my self by halfes. If a full acknowledgement purchaseth the
favor of God, it shall last me for ever unto the end: if not, I have continued long enough
to make my continuance remarkeable and worthy the registring. What, is not thirty years
a goodly time?




Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XVI: OF GLORY






CHAPTER XVI: OF GLORY
HERE is both name, and the thing: the name is a voice which noteth
and signifieth the thing: the name is neither part of thing nor of
substance: it is a stranger-piece joined to the thing and from it. God
who in and by himself is all fulnesse, and the type of all perfection,
cannot inwardly be augmented or encreased: yet may his name be
encreased and augmented by the blessing and praise which we give
unto his exteriour workes; which praise and blessing, since we cannot
incorporate into him, forasmuch as no accession of good can be had unto him, we ascribe
it unto his name, which is a part without him, and the neerest unto him. And that is the
reason why glory and honor appertaineth to God only. And there is nothing so repugnant
unto reason as for us to go about to purchase any for ourselves: for being inwardly needy
and defective, and our essence imperfect and ever wanting amendment, we ought only
labor about that. We are all hollow and empty, and it is not with breath and words we
should fil ourselves. We have need of a more solid substance to repair ourselves. An
hunger starved man might be thought most simple rather to provide himself of a fair
garment then of a good meales-meat: we must run to that which most concerneth us.
Gloria in excelsis Deo, et in terra pax hominibus. (Luke ii. 14.) ’Glory be to God on high,

and peace on earth amongst men,’ as say our ordinary prayers. We are in great want of
beautie, health, wisdom, virtue, and such like essentiall parts. Exteriour ornaments may
be sought for when we are once provided of necessary things. Divinitie does very amply
and pertinently treate of this subject, but I am not very conversant with it. Chrysippus and
Diogenes have been the first and most constant authors of the contempt of glory. And
amongst all sensualities, they said, there was as none so dangerous nor so much to be
avoided as that which commeth unto us by the approbation of others. Verily experience
makes us thereby feel and undergoe many damageable treasons. Nothing so much
empoisoneth princes as flattery. Nor nothing whereby the wicked minded gain so easy
credit about them; nor any enticement so fit, nor pandership so ordinary to corrupt the
chastity of women, then to feed and entertaine them with their praises. The first
enchantment the Syrens employed to deceive Ulisses is of this nature.
Deca vers nous, deca, o treslouable Ulisse,
Et le plus grand honneur dont la Grece fleurisse.
Turne to us, to us turn, Ulisses thrice-renowned,
The principal renown wherewith all Greece is crowned.
Philosophers said that all the worlds glory deserved not that a man of wisdom should
so much as stretch forth his finger to acquire it.
Gloria quantalibet quid erit, si gloria tantum est? -- Juven. Sat. vii. 81.
Never so gIorious name,
What ist, be it but fame?
I say for it alone: for it draws many commodities after it, by which it may yield itself
desirable: it purchaseth us good will: it makes us less exposed to others injuries and
offences and such like things. It was also one of the principal degrees of Epicurus: for
that precept of his sect, H IDE T HY L IFE , which forbideth men to meddle with public
charges and negotiations, does also necessarily presuppose that a man should despise
despise glory, which is an approbation the world makes of those actions we give evidence
of. He that bids usto hide our life and care but for ourselves, and would not have us know
of others, would also have us not to be honoured and glorified thereby. So does he counsel
Idomeneus by no means to order his actions by the vulgar opinion and public
reputation: unless it be to avoide other accidentall in-commodities which the contempt of
men might bring unto him. Those discourses (are in mine advise) very true and
reasonable: but I wot not how we are double in ourselves, which is the cause that what we
believe we believe it not, and cannot rid ourselves of that which we condemne. Let us
consider the last words of Epicurus, and which he speaks as he is dying: they are
notable and worthy such a Philosopher: but yet they have some badge of his names
commendations, and of the humor which by his precepts he had disavowed. Behold here

a letter which he edited a little before he yielded up the ghost. ’Epicurus to Hermachus
health and greeting. Whilst I pass the happy, and even the last day of my life, I write this,
accompanied nevertheless with such pain in my bladder and anguish in my entrails, that
nothing can be added unto the greatness of it; yet was it recompensed with the pleasure
which the remembrance of my inventions and discourses brought unto my soul. Now as
requireth the affection which even from the infancy you hast borne me and Philosophy,
embrace the protection of Metrodorus his children.’ See here his letter. And which makes
me interpret that the pleasure which in his soul he says to feel of his inventions, does in
some sort respect the reputation which after his death he thereby hoped to attaine, is the
ordinance of his last will and testament, by which he wills that Aminomachus and
Timocrates his heirs should for the celebration of his birth-day every month of January
supply all such charges as Hermachus should appoint: and also for the expence he might
be at on the twentieth of every moon for the feasting and entertainment of the
Philosophers his familiar friends, who in the honor of his memory and of Metrodorus
should meete together. Carneades has been chief of the contrary opinion and has
maintained that glory was in itself to be desired, even as we embrace our posthumes for
themselves, having neither knowledge nor jovissanee of them. This opinion has not
missed to be more commonly followed as are ordinarily those that fit most and come
nearest our inclinations. Aristotle amongst externall goods yieldeth the first rank unto it:
and avoideth as two extreme vices the immoderation either in seeking or avoiding it. I
believe that had we the bookes which Cicero wrote upon this subject, we should hear
strange matters of him: for he was so foolish in this passion as had he dared he would (as I
think) have easily falne into the excess that others fell in; which is that even virtue was
not to be desired but for the honor which ever waited on it
Paulum sepultæ distat inertiæ
Celata virtus. -- Hor. Car. iv. Od. ix. 29.
There is but little difference betweene
Vertue conceal’d, unskilfulnesse unseen.
Which is so false an opinion, as I am vexed it could ever enter a mans understanding
that had the honor to bear the name of a philosopher. If that were true a man needed not
to be vertuous but in public: and we should never need to keep the soules operations in
order and rule, which is the true seate of virtue, but only so much as they might come to
the knowledge of others. Does then nothing else belong unto it, but craftily to faile, and
subtilly to cozen? If you knowest a serpent to be hidden in any place (says Carneades) to
which he by whose death you hopest to reape commodity goeth unawares to sit upon,
you committest a wicked act if you warne him not of it: and so much the more because
your action should be known but to your self. If we take not the law of weldoing from our
selves: if impunity be justice in us: to how many kindes of treacherie are we daily to
abandon ourselves? That which Sp. Peduceus did, faithfully to restore the riches which C.
Plotius had committed to his only trust and secrecie, and as my self have done often, I

think not so commendable, as I would deem it execrable, if we had not done it. And I
think it beneficiall we should in our days be mindfull of Publius Sextilius Rufus his
example, whom Cicero accuses that he had received a great inheritance against his
conscience: not only not repugnant, but agreeing with the laws. And M. Crassus and Q.
Hortensius, who by reason of their authority and might, having for certain Quidities been
called by a stranger to the succession of a forged will, that so he might make his share
good: they were pleased not to be partakers of his forgery, yet refused not to take some
profit of it: very closely had they kept themselves under the countenance of the
accusations, witnesses, and laws. Meminerint Deum se habere testem, id est (ut ego
arbitror) mentem suam: ’Let them remember they have God to witness, that is (as I
construe it) their own mind.’ Vertue is a vain and frivolous thing if it draw her
commendation from glory. In vain should we attempt to make her keep her rancke apart,
and so should we disjoin it from fortune: for what is more casual then reputation?
Profecto, fortuna in omni re dominator: Ea res cuizetas ex libidine magis quam ex vero
celebrat obscuratque: ’Fortune governeth in all things, and either advaileth or abaseth
them rather by froward disposition then upri ght judgement.’ To make actions to be
known and seen, is the meere work of fortune. It is chance that applieth glory unto us,
according to her temeritie. I have often seen it to go before desert; indeed, and many times
to outgoe merit by very much. He that first bethought himself of the resemblance
betweene shadow and glory, did better than he thought of. They are exceeding vain
things. It also often goeth before her body, and sometimes exceeds by much in length.
Those who teach nobility to seek in valor nothing but honor: Quasi non sit honestum
quod nobilitatum non sit: ’As though it were not honest except it were ennobled:’ what
gain they by it? But to instruct them never to hazard themselves unless they be seen of
others; and to be very heedy whether such witnesses are by that may report news of their
valor, whereas a thousand occasions to do well are daily offered, and no man by to
marke them? How many notable, particular actions are buried in the throng of a battle.
Whosoever ammuseth himself to controle others, in so confused a burly-burly, is not
greatly busied about it: and produces the testimony which he gives of his fellowes
proceedings or exploits against himself. Vera et sapiens animi magnitude, honestum illud
quod maxime naturam sequitur, in factis positum, non in gloria indicat: ’A true and wise
magnanimity seems that honesty which especially followeth Nature, to consist in good
actions and not in glory.’ All the glory I pretend in my life is, that I have lived quietly.
Quietly not according to Metrodorus, Arcesilas, or Aristippus, but according to my self.
Since philosophy could never find any way for tranquillity that might be generally good,
let every man in his particular seek for it. To whom are Cæsar and Alexander beholding
for that infinite greatnes of their renown, but to fortune? How many men has she
suppressed in the beginning of their progresse, of whom we have no knowledge at all,
who bare the same courage that others did, if the ill fortune of their chance had not stayed
them even in the building of their enterprises? Amongst so many and so extreme dangers
(to my remembrance) I never read that Cæsar received any hurt. A thousand have dyed in
less danger than the least of those he escaped. Many worthy exploits and excellent
deedes must be lost before one can come to any good. A man is not alwaies upon the top

of the breach, nor in the front of an army, in the sight of his general, as upon a stage. A
man may be surprised betweene a hedge and a ditch. A man is sometimes put to his
sodaine shifts, as to try his fortune against a hens-roost, to ferret out foure seely shotte out
of some barne, indeed sometimes straggle alone from his troupes; and enterprise
according as necessity and occasion offereth itself. And if it be well noted (in mine
advice) it will be found, and experience does teach it, that the least blazoned occasions are
the most dangerous, and that in our late home-wars, more good men have perished in
slight and little importing occasions, and in contention about a small cottage, than in
worthy achievements and honorable places. Whoso thinketh his death ill emploied,
except it be in some glorious exploit or famous attempt, in lieu of dignifying his death, he
happily obscureth his life: suffring in the meane time many just and honor-affoording
opportunities to escape, where in he might and ought adventure himself. And all just
occasions are glorious enough; his own conscience publishing them sufficiently to all
men. Gloria nostra et testimonium conscientiæ nostra: (2 Cor. i. 12. Aug. Hom. xxxv.)
’Our glory is the testimony of our conscience.’ He that is not an honest man but by that
which other men know by him, and because he shall the better be esteemed; being known
to be so, that will not do well but upon condition his virtue may come to the knowledge of
men; such a one is no man from whom any great service may be drawne, or good
expected.
Credo ch’il resto di quel verno, cose
Facesse degne di tenerne conto,
Ma fur fin’ a quel tempo si nascose,
Che non e colpa mia s’hor’ non le conto,
Per che Orlando a far’ opre virtuose
Piu ch’ a narrle poi sempre era pronto
Ne mai fu alcun’ de li suoi fatti espresso,
Senon quando hebbe testimonii appresso. -- Ariost. Orl. can. xi. stan. 81.
I guesse, he of that winter all the rest
Atchiev’d exploits, whereof to keep account,
But they until that time were so supprest,
As now my fault ’tis not, them not to count,
Because Orlando ever was more prest
To do, than tell deeds that might all surmount.
Nor was there any of his deeds related
Unless some witness were associated.
A man must go to wars for his devoirs sake, and expect this recompence of it, which
cannot faile all worthy actions, how secret soever; no not to vertuous thoughts: it is the
contentment that a well disposed conscience receiveth in itself by well doing. A man
must be valiant for himself and for the advantage he has to have his courage placed in a
constant and assured seate, to withstand all assaults of fortune.

Virtus repulsæ nescia sordidæ,
Intaminatis fulget honoribus:
Nec sumit aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis auræ. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. ii. 17.
Vertue unskill’d to take repulse that’s base,
In undefiled honors earely shines,
At the dispose of peoples airy grace S
he signes of honor tak’s not, nor resignes.
It is not only for an exterior show or ostentation that our soul must play her part, but
inwardly within ourselves, where no eyes shine but ours: there it does shroud us from the
fear of death, of sorrowes and of shame: there it assureth us from the loss of our
children, friend, and fortunes; and when opportunity is offerd, it also leades us to the
dangers of war. Non emoluntento aliquo, sedi psius honestatis decore: (Cic. Fin i.) ’Not
for any advantage, but for the gracefulnes of honestie itself.’ Thls benefit is much
greater, and more worthie to be wished and hoped than honor and glory, which is nought
but a favorable judgment that is made of us. We are often driven to empanell and select a
jury of twelve men out of a whole countrie to determine of an acre of land: And the
judgement of our inclinations and actions (the weightiest and hardest matter that is) we
refer it to the idle breath of the vain voice of the common sort and base raskalitie,
which is the mother of ignorance, of injustice and inconstancie. Is it reason to make the
life of a wise man depend on the judgement of fooles? An quidquam stultius, quam quos
singulos contemnas, eos aliquid putare esse universos? (Ælian. Var. Hist. ii. c. 1.) ’Is
there anything more foolish then to think that al together they are oughts, whom every
one single you would set at noughts? Whosoever aimeth to please them has never done.
It is a Butt, that has neither form nor holdfast. Nil tam inæstimabile est, quam aninti
multitudinis: ’Nothing is so incomprehensible to be just waied, as the minds of the
multitude.’ Demetrius said merrily of the common peoples voice, that he made no more
reckoning of that which issued from out his mouth above, then of that which came from a
homely place below; and says moreover: Ego hoc judico, si quando turpe non sit, tamen
non esse non turpe, quum id a multitudine laudetur: (Cic. Fin. Bon. ii.) ’Thus I esteem of
it, if of itself it be not dishonest, yet can it not but be dishonest, when it is applauded [by]
the many.’ No art, no mildness of spirit might direct our steps to follow so stragling and
disordered a guide. In this breathie confusion of bruites and frothy Chaos of reports and of
vulgar opinions, which still push us on, no good course can be established. Let us not
propose so fleeing and so wavering an end unto ourselves. Let us constantly follow
reason: And let the vulgar approbation follow us that way. If it please: And as it depends
all on fortune, we have no law to hope for it, rather by any other way then by that. Should
I not follow a strait path for its straightnesse, yet would I do it because experience has
taught me that in the end it is the happiest and most profitable. Dedit hoc providentia
hominibus munus at honesta magis juvarent: ’ Mans providence has given him this gift,

that honest things should more delight and avail him.’ The ancient Sailer said thus to
Neptune in a great storme, ’Oh God, you shall save me if you please, if not, you shall
lose me; yet will I keep my helme still fast,’ I have in my days seen a thousand middle,
mungrell and ambiguous men, and whom no man doubted to be more worldly-wise than
my self, lose themselves, where I have saved my self.
Risi successu posse carere dolos -- Ovid. Epist. Penel. v. 18.
I smild to see that wily plots
Might want success (and leave men sots).
Paulus Emilius going to the glorious expedition of Macedon, advertised the people of
Rome during his absence not to speak of his actions: For the licence of judgements is an
especiall let in great affairs. Forasmuch as all men have not the constancy of Fabius
against common, contrary and detracting voices: who loved better to have his authority
dismembred by mens vain fantasies, then not to performe his charge so well, with
favourable and popular applause. There is a kind of I know not what natural delight that
man has to hear himself commended, but we yield too-too much unto it.
Laudari haud metuam, neque enim mihi cornea fibra est,
Sed recti finemque extremumque esse recuso
Euge tuum et belle. -- Pers. Sat. i. 47.
Nor fear I to be prais’d, for my guttes are not horne,
But that the utmost end of good should be, I scorne,
Thy O well said, well done, well plaid.’
I care not so much what I am with others, as I respect what I am in my self. I will be
rich by my self and not by borrowing. Strangers see but external apparances and events:
every man can set a good face upon the matter, when within he is full of care, grief and
infirmities. They see not my heart when they looke upon my outward countenance. There
is great reason the hypocrisie that is found in war should be discovered: for, what is more
easy in a man of practise then to flinch in dangers and to counterfeit a gallant and a
boaster when his heart is full of faintnesse and ready to droope for fear? There are so
many waies to shunne occasions for a man to hazard himself in particular, that we shall
have deceived the world a thousand times before we need engage ourselves into any
perillous attempt; and even when we find ourselves entangled in it, we shall not want
skill how to cloake our sport with a good face, searne countenance, and bold speeches;
although our heart do quake within us. And he that had the use of the Platonicall Ring,
whose virtue was to make him invisible that wore it upon his finger, if it were turned
toward the flat of the hand; many would hide themselves when they should most make
shewe of their worth, and would be sorie to be placed in so honorable a place where

necessity may be their warrant of safetie.
Falsus honor iuvat, et mendax infamia terra
Quem nisi mendosum et mendacem -- Hor. i. Ep. xvi. 39.
False honor tickles; false defame affrights,
Whom, but the faulty, and false-fierd sprights?
See how all those judgements that men make of outward apparences are wonderfully
uncertaine and doubtfull, and there is no man so sure a testimony, as every man is to
himself: How many horse-boye’s have we in them as parteners and companions of our
glory? He that keepes his stand in an open trench, what does he more, but diverse poore
pioners do as much before him, who open the way for him, and with their bodies shelter
him for poore sixpence a day, and happily for less?
----- non quicguid turbida Roma
Elevet, acced as, examenque improbum in illa
Castiges trutina, nec te quæsiveris extra. -- Pers. Sat. i. 5.
If troublous Rome set ought at nought, make you not one,
Nor chastise you unjust examination
In balance of their lode:
Nor seek your self abrode.
We call that a magnifying of our name, to extend and diperse the same in many
mouthes; we will have it to be received in good part, and that its increase redound to his
benefit: this is al that is most excusable in its design. But the infirmity of its excess
proceeds so far that many labor to have the world speak of them, however it be.
Trogus Pompeius says of Herostratus, and Titus Livius of Manlius Capitolinus, that they
were more desirous of great then good reputation. It is an ordinary fault; we endeavor
more that men should speak of us, then how and what they speak, and it sufficeth us that
our name run in mens mouthes, in what manner soever. It seems that to be knowen is in
some sort to have life and continuance in other mens keeping. As for me I hold that I am
but in my self; and of this other life of mine which consisteth in the knowledge of my
friends, being simply and barely considered in my self well I wot, I neither feel fruite or
jovissance of it, but by the vanity of fantastic opinion. And when I shall be dead, I shall
much less have a feeling of it: And shall absolutely lose the use of true utilities which
sometimes accidentally follow it: I shall have no more fastnesse to take hold on
reputation, nor whereby it may either concerne or come unto me. For, to expect my name
should receive it, First, I have no name that is sufficiently mine: of two I have, the one is
common to all my race, indeed also to others. There is a family at Paris and another at
Montpellier called Montaigne, another in Britany, and one in Xaintonge, surnamed de la

Montaigne. The removing of one only syllable may so confound our webbe, as I shall
have a share in their glory, and they perhaps a part of my shame. And my Ancestors have
heretofore been surnamed Higham or Eyquem, a surname which also belongs to a house
well knowen in England. As for my other name, it is any bodies that shall have a mind to
it. So shall I happily honor a Porter in my stead. And suppose I had a particular marke or
badge for my self, what can it marke when I am no more extant? May it design or
favor inanity?
-----nunc levior cippus non imprimit ossa?
Laudat posteritas; nunc non e manibus illis,
Nunc non e tumulo fortunataque favilla
Nascuntur violæ? -- Ibid. 37.
Does not the grave-stone on such bones sit light?
Posterity applaudes: from such a spright,
From such a tombe, from ashes blessed so,
Shall there not Violets (in cart-lodes) grow?
But of this I have spoken elsewhere. As for the rest, in a whole battle, where ten
thousand are either maymed or slain, there are not perhaps fifteene that shall be
much spoken off. It must be some eminent greatness or important consequence that
fortune has joined unto it to make a private action prevaile, not of a meane shot alone,
but of a chieftaine: for to kill a man or two or tenne; for one to present himself
undantedly to death, is indeed something to every one of us in particular: for a mans free-
hold goes on it: But in regarde of the world they are such ordinary things, so many are
daily seen, and so sundry likewise must concurre together to produce a notable effect, that
we can looke for no particular commendation by them.
---- casus multis hic cognitus, ac iam
Tritus, et e medio fortuno ductus acervo. -- Juven. Sat. xiii. 9.
This case is known of many, worne with nothing,
Drawne from the midle heape of fortunes doting.
Of so many thousands of worthie-valiant men, which fifteene hundred years since have
died in France with their weapons in hand, not one hundred have come to our knowledge:
The memory not only of the Generals and Leaders, but also of the battles and victories
lieth now low-buried in oblivion. The fortunes of more than halfe the world, for want of a
register, stir not from their place, and vanish away without continuance. Had I all the
unknown events in my possession, I am persuaded I might easily supplant those that are
known in all kindes of examples. What, of the Romanes themselves and of the Græcians,
amongst so many writers and testimonies, and so infinit rare exploites and matchles

examples, how are so few of them come to our notice?
Ad nos vix tenuis famæ perlabitur aura. -- Virg. Æn. vii.646.
Scarcely to us does pass
Fames thin breath, how it was.
It shall be much, if a hundred years hence the civill wars which lately we have had in
France, be but remembred in grosse. The Lacedemonians, as they were going to their
battles, were wont to sacrifice unto the Muses to the end their deedes might be well
written and worthily registred; deeming it a divine favor and unusuall grace, that noble
actions might find testimonies able to give them life and memory. Thinke we that at
every shot that hits us or at every dangerous attempt we run into to have a clarke present
to enrole it : and besides, it may be that an hundred clarkes shall write them, whose
commentaries shall not continue three days and shall never come to anybodys sight. We
have but a thousandth part of ancient writings: It is Fortune, which according to her favor
gives them either shorter or longer life; and what we have, we may lawfully doubt of,
whether it be the worse, since we never saw the rest. Histories are not written upon every
small trifle: It is requisite that a man have been conqueror of an Empire or of a
Kingdome; a man must have obtained two and fiftie set battles, and ever with a lesser
number of men, as Cæsar did. Tenne thousand good-fellowes, and many great captaines
have died most valiantly and coragiously in pursuite of her, whose names have continued
no longer then their wives and children lived:
------- quos fama obscura recondit. -- Virg. Æn. v. 292.
Whom fame obscure before
Layes up in unknown store.
Even of those whom we see to do excellently well, if they have but once continued so
three months, or so many years, there is no more speech of them then if they had never
bin. Whosoever shall in due measure proportion and impartially consider, of what kind of
people, and of what deedes the glory is kept in the memory of bookes, he shall find there
are few actions and very few persons that may justly pretend any right in them. How many
vertuous men have we seen to survive their own reputation, who even in their presence
have seen the honor and glory which in their young days they had right-justly purchased,
to be cleane extinguished? And do we for three years of this fantastic and imaginarie
life lose and foregoe our right and essentiall life, and engage ourselves in a perpetuall
death? The wiser sort propose a right-fairer and much more just end unto themselves, to
so urgent and weighty an enterprise. Recte facti, f ecisse merces est: Officii fructi, ipsum
officium est: (Senec. Epist. lxxxi.) ’The reward of well-doing is the doing, and the fruit of
our duty is our duty.’ It might perhaps be excusable in a Painter or other artificer, or

also in a Rhetorician or Gramarian, by his labours to endevor to purchase a name: But the
actions of virtue are themselves too-too noble to seek any other reward then by their own
worth and merit, and especially to seek it in the vanity of mans judgement. If this false-
foolish opinion do notwithstanding serve and stead a common wealth to hold men to their
dutie: if the people be thereby stirred up to virtue: if Princes be any way touched to see
the world blesse and commend the memory of Trajan, and detest the remembrance of
Nero: if that does moove them to see the name of that arch-villanie, heretofore so
dreadfull and so much redoubted of all, so boldly cursed and so freely outraged by the first
scholer that undertakes him: Let it hardly be increased, and let us (as much as in us l ieth)
still foster the same amongst ourselves. And Platoe employing all means to make his
Citizens vertuous, does also persuade them not to contemne the peoples good estimation.
And says that through some divine inspiration it commeth to pass that even the wicked
know often, as well by word as by opinion, how to distinguish justly the good from the
bad. This man, together with his master, are wonderful and bold workmen to join divine
operations and revelations wherever humane force faileth. And therefore did
perventure Timon (deeming thereby to wrong him) surname him the great forger of
miracles. Vt tragici poetæ confugiunt ad Deum, cum explicare argumenti exitum non
possunt. (Cic. Nat. Deor. i.) ’As Poets that write Tragedies have recourse to some God
when they cannot unfold the end of their argument.’ Since men by reason of their
insufliciencie cannot well pay themselves with good lawfull coine, let them also employ
false money. This meane has been practised by all the law-givers: And there is no
common wealth where there is not some mixture either of ceremonious vanity or of false
opinion, which as a restraint serveth to keep the people in awe and dutie. It is therefore
that most of them have such fabulous grounds and trifling beginnings, and enriched with
supernaturall mysteries. It is that which has given credit unto adulterate and unlawfull
religions, and has induced men of understanding to favor and countenance them. And
therefore did Noma and Sertorius, to make their men have a better beliefe, feed them with
this foppery: the one, that the Nimph Egeria, the other that his white Hinde, brought him
all the councels he took from the Gods. And the same authority which Numa gave his
laws under the title of this Goddesses patronage, Zoroaster, Law-giver to the Bactrians
and Persians, gave it to his, under the name of the God Oromazis. Trismegistus, of the
Egyptians, of Mercury: Zamolzis, of the Scithians, of Vesta: Charondas, of the
Chalcedonians, of Saturne: Minos, of the Candiots, of Jupiter: Lycurgus, of the
Lacedemonians, of Apollo: Dracon and Solon, of the Athenians, of Minerva. And every
common wealth has a God to her chief: al others falsly, but that truly which Moses
instituted for the people of Jewry descended from Egypt. The Bedoins religion (as says
the Lord of Jouinvile) held among other things that his soul which among them all died
for his Prince went directly into another more happy body much fairer and stronger than
the first: by means whereof they much more willingly hazarded their lives for his sake.
In ferrum mens prona viris animæque capaces
Mortis: et ignavum est redituræ parcere vitæ. -- Lucan. i. 461.

Those men sword minded, can death entertaine,
Thinke base to spare the life that turnes again.
See here, although very vain , a most needfull doctrine and profitable beliefe. Everie
Nation has store of such examples in itself. But this subject would require a severall
discourse. Yet to say a word more concerning my former purpose: I do not counsell
Ladies any longer to call their duty honor: vt enim consuetudo loquitur, id solum dicitur
honestum, quod est populari fama gloriosum: (Cic. Fin. ii.) ’For as custom speaks, that
only is called honest which is glorious by popular report.’ Their duty is the marke; their
honor but the barke of it. Nor do I persuade them to give us this excuse of their refusall
in payment; for I suppose their intentions, their desire, and their will, which are parts
wherein honor can see nothing, forasmuch as nothing appeareth outwardly, there are yet
more ordered then the effects.
Quæ, quia non liceat, non facit, illa facit. -- Ovid. Am. iii. El. iv. 4.
She does it, though she do it not
Because she may not do’t (Got wot).
The offence both toward God and in conscience would be as great to desire it as to
effect the same. Besides, they are in themselves actions secret and hid; it might easily be,
they would steale some one from others knowledge, whence honor dependeth, had they
no other respect to their duty and affection which they bear unto chastity, in regard of it
self. Each honorable person chuseth rather to lose his honor than to forgoe his
conscience.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XVII: OF PRESUMPTION






CHAPTER XVII: OF PRESUMPTION
HERE IS another kind of glory, which is an over-good opinion we
conceive of our worth. It is an inconsiderate affection, wherewith we
cherish ourselves, which presents us unto ourselves other then we are.
As an amorous passion addeth beauties and lendeth graces to the
subject it embraceth, and maketh such as are therewith possessed, with
a troubled conceit and distracted judgmement, to deem what they
love, and find what they affect, to be other, and seem more perfect,
then in trueth it is. Yet would I not have a man, for fear of offending in that point, to
misacknowledge himself, nor think to be less then he is: A true judgement should
wholly and in every respect mainetaine his right. It is reason, that as in other things, so in
this subject he see what truth presenteth unto him. If he be Cæsar, let him boldly deem
himself the greatest Captain of the world. We are nought but ceremony: ceremony does
transport us, and we leave the substance of things; we hold-fast by the boughs, and leave
the trunke or body. We have taught ladies to blush, only by hearing that named which
they nothing fear to do. We dare not call our members by their proper names, and fear
not to employ them in all kind of dissolutenese. Ceremonie forbids us by words to
express lawfull and natural things; and we believe it. Reason wills us to do no bad or

unlawfull things, and no man gives credit unto it. Here I find my self entangled in the
laws of Ceremonie, for it neither allowes a man to speak ill or good of himself.
Therefore will we leave her at this time. Those whom fortune (whether we shall name
her good or bad) has made to pass their life in some eminent or conspicuous degree,
may by their public actions witness what they are; but those whom she never emploied
but in base things, and of whom no man shall ever speak, except themselves do it, they
are excusable if they dare speak of themselves to such as have interest in their
acquaintance, after the example of Lucillus:
Ille velut fidis arcana sodalibus olim
Credebat libris: neque si male cesserat, usquam
Decurrens alio, neque si bene: quo fit, ut omnis
Votiva pateat veluti descripta tabella
Vita senis. -- Hor. Ser. ii. Sat. i. 30.
He trusted to his book, as to his trusty friend
His secrets, nor did he to other refuge bend,
How ever well, or ill, with him his fortune went.
Hence is it, all the life is seen the old man spent,
As it were in a Table noted,
Which were unto some God devoted.
This man committed his actions and imaginations to his paper, and as he felt, so he
pourtraied himself. Nec id Rutilio et Scauro citra fidem, aut obtrectationi fuit: (Corn.
Tacit. Vit. Jul. Agric.) ’Nor was that without credit, or any imputation to Rutilius or
Scaurus.’ I remember then, that even from my tenderest infancy, some noted in me a kind
of I know not what fashion in carrying of my body and gestures, witnessing a certain
vain and foolish fiercenesse. This I will first say of it, that it is not inconvenient to have
conditions so peculiar, and propensions so incorporated in us, that we have no meane to
feel, or way to know them. And of such natural inclinations, unknown to us, and
without our consent, the body does easily retaine some signe or impression. It was an
affectation witting of his beauty, which made Alexander to bend his head a little on one
side, and Alcibiades, his speech somewhat effeminate and lisping: Julius Cæsar was wont
to scratch his head with one finger, which is the countenance of a man surcharged with
painefull imaginations: and Cicero (as I remember) had gotten a custom to wryth his
nose, which signifieth a natural scoffer. Such motions may unawares and imperceptibly
possesse us. Others there be which are artificiall, whereof I will not speak. As
salutations, reverences, or conges, by which some do often purchase the honor (but
wrongfully) to be humble, lowly, and courteous: a man may be humble through glory. I
am very prodigall of cappings, namely in Summer, and I never receive any from what
quality of men soever, but I give them as good and as many as they bring, except he be
some servant of mine. I wish that some Princes whom I know would be more sparing and
impartiall dispencers of them, for, being so indiscreetly employed, they have no force at

all: If they be without regard, then are they without effect. Amongst disordered
countenances, let us not forget the stern looke of Constantius the Emperor, who in
public held ever his head bolt-upright, without turning or bending the same on any side,
no not so much as to looke on them that saluted him sideling, holding his body so fixt and
unmoveable, that let his coche shake never so much, he kept still up-right: he durst never
spit nor wipe his nose nor drie his face before the people. I wot not whether those gestures
which were noted in me were of this first condition, and whether in truth I had any secret
propension to this fault, as it may well be: and I cannot answer for the motions of my
body. But concerning those of the soul, I will here ingenuously confesse what I think of
them. There are two parts in this glory: which is to say, for a man to esteeme himself
overmuch, the other, not sufficiently to esteeme of others. For the one, first me thinks
these considerations ought somewhat to be accompted of. I feel my self surcharged with
one error of the mind, which both as bad, and much more as importunate, I utterly
dislike. I endeavor to correct it; but I cannot displace it. It is, because I abate the just value
of those things which I possesse; and enhance the worth of things by how much they are
more strange, absent and not my own. This humor extends itself very far, as does
the prerogative of the authority, wherewith husbands looke upon their own wives with a
vicious disdaine, and many fathers upon their children: so do I, and betweene two like
workes would I ever weigh against mine. Not so much that the jealousie of my
preferment, and amendment troubleth my judgement, and hindereth me from pleasing my
self, as that mastery herself begets a contempt of that which a man possesseth and
oweth. Policies, far customs and tongues flatter me; and I perceive the Latine tongue by
the favor of her dignity to deceive me, beyond what belongs unto her, as children and the
vulgar sort. My neighbors economie; his house, and his horse, though but of equall
value, is more worth then mine by how much more it is not my own. Besides, because I
am most ignorant in my own matters, I admire the assurance, and wonder at the
promise that every man has of himself: whereas there is almost nothing that I wot I
know, nor that I dare warrant my self to be able to do. I have not my faculties in
proposition or by estate, and am not instructed in them but after the effect; as doubtfull of
my own strength, as uncertaine of anothers force. Whence it followeth, if
commendably I chance upon any one piece of work, I rather impute it to my fortune, then
ascribe it to mine industry; forasmuch as I designe them all to hazard and in fear.
Likewise I have this in general, that of all the opinions which Antiquity has had of men
in gross, those which I most willingly embrace, and whereon I take most hold, are such as
most vilifie, condemne, and annihilate us. Me thinks Philosophy has never better cards
to show then when she checketh our presumption, and crosseth our vanity; when in good
sooth she acknowledgeth her irresolution, her weaknesse and her ignorance. Me seems
the over good conceit and self-weening opinion man has of himself, is the nurse-
mother of the falsest opinions, both public and particular. Those which a cocke-horse
will pearch themselves upon the Epicicle of Mercury and see so far into heaven, they
even pull out my teeth. For in the study which I professe, the subject whereof is Man,
finding so extreme a inextricable a labyrinth of difficulties, one upon the necke of another,
so great diversitie, and so much uncertaintie, indeed even in the school of wisdom itself:

you may imagine since those men could never be resolved of the knowledge of
themselves and of their own condition, which is continually before their eyes, which is
ever within them; since they know not how that moveth which themselves cause to move,
nor how to set forth the springs, and decipher the wards, which themselves hold and
handle, how should I think of the true cause of the flux and reflux of the river Nilus? The
curiosity to know things has been given to men (as says the holy Scripture for a
scourge. But to come to my particular, it is very hard (me seems) that some other
regardeth him self less, indeed some other esteemeth me less than I esteeme my self.
I accompt my self of the common sort, except in that I deem myself guiltie of the
basest, and culpable most popular defects: but not disavowed nor excused. And I only
prise my self wherein I know my worth. If any glory be in me, it is but superficially
infused into me; by the treason of my complexion: and has no solid body appearing to
the sight of my judgement. I am but sprinckled over, but not throughly dyed. For in truth,
touching the effects of the spirit in what manner soever, there never came any thing from
me that contented me. And others approbation is no currant payment for me. My
judgement is tender and hard, especially in my own behalf. I feel my self to waver and
bend through weaknesse: I have nothing of my own to satisfie my judgement. My sight
is indifferently clear and regular; but if I take any serious work in hand, it is troubled
and dimmed: as I perceive most evidently in poesie: I love it exceedingly: I have some
insight or knowledge in other mens labours, but in truth I play the novice when I set my
hand unto it: then can I not abide my self. A man may play the foole every where else,
but not in poesie:
-----mediocribus esse poetis
Non dii, non homines, non concessere, columnæ. -- Hor. Art. Poet. 372.
Nor Gods, nor men, nor pillers gave the graunt,
That Poets in a meane, should meanely chaunt.
I would to God this sentence were found in the front of our printers or stationers shops,
to hinder the entrance of so many bald-rimers.
-----verum
Nil securius est malo Poeta. -- Mart. xii. Epig. lxiv.
Nothing securer may be had,
Then is a Poet bold and bad.
Why have we no such people? Dionysius the father esteemed nothing in himself so
much as his poesie. In the times of the Olimpike games, with chariots exceeding all other
in magnificence, he also sent poets and musitians to present his verses, with tents and
pavillions gilt and most suinptuously tapistried. When they first beganne to rehearse them,

the favor and excellencie of the pronunciation did greatly allure the peoples attention: but
when they beganne to consider the fondnesse of the composition, they fell as soone to
contemne them: and being more and more exasperated, fell furiously into an uproare; and
headlong ranne in most spitefull manner to teare and cast down all his pavillions. And
forasmuch as his rich chariots did no good at all in their course, and the ship which carried
his men, returning homeward, missed the shore of Sicilie, and was by violent stormes
driven and spilt upon the coast of Tarentum, they certainely beleeved the wrath of the
Gods to have been the cause of it, as being greatly offended both against him and his vile
and wicked poeme: indeed the mariners themselves that escaped the shipwracke did
much second the peoples opinion: to which the oracle that foretold his death seemed in
some sort to subscribe: which implied that Dionysius should be neare his end, at what time
he had vanquished those that should be of more worth than himself; which he interpreted
to be the Carthaginians, who exceeded him in might. And having at any time an occasion
to fight with them, that that he might not incur the meaning of his prediction, he would
often temper and avoide the victory. But he mis-understood the matter, for God observed
the time of advantage, when as through partiall favor and injustice he obtained the
victory over the tragical poets of Athens, who were much better than he was, where he
caused, in contention of them, his tragedie, entitled the Leneiens, to be publikely acted.
After which usurped victory, he presently deceased: and partly through the excessive joy
he thereby conceived. What I find excusable in mine is not of itself and according to
truth: but in comparison of other compositions, worse then mine, to which I see some
credit given. I envie the good the happe of those which can applaude and gratifie
themselves by their own labours; for it is an easy matter for one to please himself, since
he draws his pleasure from himself: especially if one be somewhat constant in his own
wilfulnesse. I know a poetaster, gainst whom both weake and strong, in company and at
home, both heaven and earth, affirme and say he has no skill or judgement in poesie, who
for all that is nothing dismaied, nor will not abate one jote of that measure whereunto he
has fitted himself; but is ever beginning again, ever consulting anew, and alwaies
persisting; by so much the more fixed in his opinion by how much the more it concerneth
him alone, and he only is to maintaine it. My compositions are so far from applauding
me, that as many times as I looke them over, so often am I vexed at them.
Cum relego, scripsisse pudet, quia plurima cerno,
Me quoque qui feci judice, digna lini. --- Ovid. Pont. 1.i. c.vi. 15.
When I re-read, I shame I write; for much I see,
My self, who made them, being judge, blotted to be.
I have ever an Idea in my mind which presents me with a better form then that I have
alreadie framed; but I can neither lay hold on it nor effect it. Yet is that Idea but of the
meaner stamp. I thereby conclude that the productions of those rich and great mindes of
former ages are far beyond the extreme extention of my wish and imagination. Their
compositions do not only satisfie and fill me, but they astonish and wrap me into

admiration. I judge of their beauty, I see it, if not to the end, at least so far as it is
impossible for me to aspire unto it. Whatsoever I undertake (as Plutarke says of one) I
owe a sacrifice to the Graces, hoping thereby to gain their favor.
------ si quid enim placet,
Si quid dulce hominum, sensibus influit.
Debentur lepidis omnia gratiis.
If ought do please, if any sweet
The sense of men with pleasures greet,
To thank the Graces it is meet.
They altogether forsake me: what I do, it is but bunglingly, and wants both polishing
and beauty. I can rate them at no higher value then they are worth. My workmanship
addeth no grace unto the matter. And that’s the reason I must have it strong, with good
holdfast, and shining of itself. If I chance to seize on any popular or more gay, it is to
follow me, who love not a ceremonious prudence and gloomy wisdom, as does the
world; and to glad my self, not my stile, who would rather have it grave and severe; if at
least I may call that a stile which is formelesse and abrupt speech; a popular gibrish, and a
proceeding without definition, without partition, and sans conclusion, troubled as that of
Amasanius and Rabirius. I am neither pleased, nor glad, nor tickled. The best tale in the
world coming into my hands becomes withered and tarnished. I cannot speak but in
good earnest, and am altogether barren of that facility which I see in many of my
companions, to entertaine [first] commers, to keep a whole troupe in talk, to ammuse a
princes ears with all manner of discourses and never to be weary, and never to want
matter, by reason of the graces they have in applying their first approches, and fitting them
to the humor and capacity of those they have to do withall. Princes love not greatly
serious and long discourses, nor I to tell tales. The first and easiest reasons (which are
commonly the best taken) I can neither employ nor make use of them. I am an ill orator to
the common sort. I speak the utmost I know of all matters. Cicero thinks, in discourses of
philosophy, the exordium to be the hardest part: if it be so, I wisely lay hold on the
conclusion. Yet should a man know how to turn his strings to all aires: and the sharpest
comes ever last in play. There is at last as much perfection in raising up an empty as to
uphold a weighty thing: a man must sometimes handle matters but superficially, and at
other times dive into them. I wot well that most men keep themselves on this low stage
because they conceive not of things but by the outward show. I also know that the greatest
clarkes, indeed Xenophon and Plato, are often seen to yield to this low and popular fashion,
in speaking of matters, upholding it with those graces which they never want. As for the
rest, my language has neither facility nor fluency in it, but is harsh and sharpe, having
free and unsinnowy dispositions. And so it liketh me, if not by my judgement, yet by my
inclination. But yet I perceive that sometimes I wade too far into it, and that forcing my
self to avoide art and affectation, I fall into it another way.

------ brevis esse labore:
Obscurus fio. -- Hor. Art. Poet. 25.
To be short labor I?
I darker grow thereby.
Plato says, that either long or short are not properties that either diminish or give price
unto speech. If I should undertake to follow this other smoothe, even and regular stile, I
should never attaine unto it. And although the cadences and breakings of Salust do best
agree with my humor, yet do I find Cæsar both greater and less easy to be
represented. And if my inclination does rather carrie me to the imitation of Senecæs stile,
I omit not to esteeme Plutarke much more. As well in silence as in speech, I am simply
my natural form, whence happily ensueth that I am more in speaking than in writing.
The motions and actions of the body give life unto words, namely, in them that move
roundly and without affectation, as I do, a nd that will be earnest. Behaviour, the face, the
voice, the gowne, and the place, may somewhat endeare those things which in themselves
are but meane, as pratling. Messala complaineth in Tacitus of certain strait garments used
in his time, and discommendeth the fashion of the benches whereon the Orators were to
speak, saying they weakened their eloquence. My French tongue is corrupted both in the
pronunciation and elsewhere by the barbarisme of my country. I never saw men of these
hither-countries that did not evidently taste of his home-speech, and who often did not
wound those ears that are purely French. Yet it is not because I am so cunning in my
Perigordin: for I have no more use of it than of the Dutch, nor do I greatly care. It is a
language (as are many others round about me) like to that of Poitou, Xaintonge,
Angoulesme, Limosin, and Auvergne, squattering, dragling, and filthie. There is about us,
towards the mountaines, a Gascoine tongue, which I much commend and like, sinnowie,
pithie, short, significant, and in truth man-like and military; more than any other I
understand. As compendious, powerfull, and pertinent as the French is gracious, delicate,
and copious. As for the Latine, which was given me for my mother-tongue, by reason of
discontinuance, I have so lost the promptitude, of it, as I cannot well make use of it in
speech, and scarcely in writing, in which I have heretofore been so ready, that I was
called a master in it. See here my little sufficiencie in that behalfe. Beauty is a part of
great commendation in the commerce and societie of men. It is the chief meane of
reconciliation betweene one and other. Nor is there any man so barbarous and so hard-
hearted, that in some sort feeleth not himself strucken with her sweetnes. The body has a
great part in our being, and therein keepes a speciall rancke. For his structure and
composition are worthy due consideration. Such as go about to sunder our two principal
parts, are much to blame; they ought rather to be coupled and joined fast together. The
soul must be enjoyned not to retire to herself her quarter, nor to entertaine herself
apart, nor to despise and leave the body (which she cannot well do, except it be by some
counterfeited, apish tricke) but ought so combine and cling fast unto him, to embrace, to
cherish, assist, correct, persuade, and advise him, and if he chance to sway or stray, then
to leade and direct him: In fine, she should wed and serve him instead of a husband, that

so their effects may not seem contrary and diverse, but agreeing and uniform. Christians
have a particular instruction concerning this bond, for they know that Gods justice
alloweth this society, and embraceth this conjunction of the body and soul, indeed so far
as to make the body capable of everlasting rewards. And that God beholds the whole man
to work, and will have him entirely to receive either the punishment or the recompence,
ac cording to his demerits. The Peripatetike Sect (of all Sects the most sociable) attributeth
this only care unto wisdom, in common to procure and provide the good of these two
associated parts: and declareth other sects to have partialized overmuch, because they had
given themselves to the full consideration of this commixture; this one for the body, this
other for the soul, with one like error and oversight, and had mistaken their subject,
which is man; and their guide, which in general they avouched to be Nature. The first
distinction that has been amongst men, and the first consideration that gave
preheminences to some over others, it is very likely it was the advantage of beauty.
------ agros divisere atque dedere
Pro facie cuiusque et viribus ingenioque:
Nam facies multum valuit virisque vigebant. -- Lucr. v. 1120.
They lands divided, and to each man shared
As was his face, his strength, his wit compared,
For face and strength were then
Much priz’d amongst men.
I am of a stature somewhat under the meane. This default has not only uncomlinesse in
it, but also incommoditie: Yea even in those which have charge and commandement over
others; for the authority which a fair presence and corporall majestic endoweth a man
withal is wanting. Caius Marius did not willingly admit any Soldiers in his bands that
were not six foot high. The Courtier has reason to require all ordinary stature in the
gentleman he frameth, rather than any other: and to avoid all strangenesse that may make
him to be pointed at. But if he misse of this mediocritie, to chuse that he rather offend in
lownes than in tallnes. I would not do it in a militarie man. Little men, says Aristotle, are
indeed pretty, but not beauteous, nor goodly; and in greatnes is a great soul known as is
beauty in a great and high body. The Ethiopians and Indians, says he, in chusing of their
Kings and Magistrates, had an especiall regard to the beautie and tallnes of the persons.
They had reason, for it breedeth an awful respect in those that follow him, and a kind of
fear in his enemies, to see a goodly, tall, and handsome man march as chief and general
in the head of any army, or front of a troupe:
Ipse inter primos præstanti corporeTurnus
Vertitur, arma tenens, et toto vertice suprit est. -- Virg. Æn. vii. 725.
Turnus, a goodly man, mongst them that led,

Stood arm’d, then all they higher by the head.
Our great, divine, and heavenly King, all whose circumstances ought with much care,
religion, and reverence, to be noted and observed, has not refused the bodies
commendation. Speciosus forma præ filiis hominum. (Psal. xlv. 3) ’In favor beautiful
above the sons of men.’ And Plato wisheth beautie to be joined unto temperance and
fortitude in the preservers of his Commonwealth. Is it not a great spite, if being amongst
your own servants, a stranger commeth to yourselfe to ask you where your Lord or
Master is? And that you have nothing but the remainder of a capping, which is as well put
off to your Barber, or to your Secretarie? As it happened to poore Philopoemen, who
having left his company behind, and coming alone into a house where he was expresly
looked for, his hostess, who knew him not, and saw him to be so il-favored a fellow,
employed him to help her maides draw water, and to mend the fire for the service of
Philopoemen. The gentlemen of his traine being come and finding him so busily at work
(for he failed not to fulfil his hostesses commandement, enquired of him what he did, who
answered,’ I pay the penaltie of my unhandsomnesse.’ Other beauties are for women. The
beautie of a handsome comely tallnesse is the only beautie of men. Where lownesse and
littlenesse is, neither the largenesse nor roundnesse of a forehead, nor the whiteness nor
lovelinesse of the eyes, nor the pretty fashion of a nose, nor the slendernes of the eare,
littlenesse of the mouth, order and whiteness of teeth, smooth thicknesse of a beard,
browne like a chesse-nut, well-curled and upstanding hair, just proportion of the head,
freshnes of colour, the cheereful aspect of a pleasing face, the sweet-smelling of a body,
nor the well decorated composition of all limbs, can make a handsome beauteous man.
As for me, I am of a strong and well compacted stature, my face is not fat but full, my
complexion betweene joviall and melancholy, indifferently sanguine and hot.
Vnde rigent setis mihi crura, et pectora villis: -- Mart. vi. Epig. lvi. 1.
Whereby my legs and brest,
With rough hair are opprest.
My health is blith and lustie, though well-stroken in age, seldom troubled with
diseases: Such I was, for I am now engaged in the approaches of age, having long since
past over forty years.
-----minutatim vires et robur adultum
Frangit, et in partem pejorem liquitur ætas. -- Lucr. ii. 1140.
By little and a little age breakes strength,
To worse and worse declining melts at length.
What hereafter I shall be will be but half a being. I shall be no more my self. I daily

escape, and still steale my self from my self:
Singula de nobis anni prædantur euntes. -- Hor. ii. Epist. ii. 55.
Yeares as they pass away,
Of all our things make prey.
Of addressing, dexteritie, and disposition, I never had any, yet am I the son of a well
disposed father, and of so blithe and merry a disposition, that it continued with him even
to his extreamest age. He seldom found any man of his condition, and that could match
him in all exercises of the body; as I have found few that have not out-gone me, except it
were in running, wherein I was of the middle sort. As for music, were it either in voice,
which I have most harsh, and very unapt, or in instruments, I could never be taught any
part of it. As for dancing, playing at tennis, or wrestling, I could never attaine to any
indifferent sufficiencie, but none at all in swimming, in fencing, in vaulting, or in leaping.
My hands are so stiffe and nummie, that I can hardly write for my self, so that what I
have once scribled, I had rather frame it anew than take the paines to correct it; and I read
but little better. I perceive how the auditorie censureth me; otherwise I am no bad clarke. I
cannot very well close up a letter, nor could I ever make a pen. I was never good carver at
the table. I could never make readie nor arm a horse; nor handsomely array a hawke on
my fist, nor cast her off, or let her flie, nor could never speak to dogges, to birds, or to
horses. The conditions of my body are, in fine, very well agreeing with those of my
mind, wherein is nothing lively, but only a compleate and constant vigor. I endure
labor and pain, yet not very well, unless I carry myself unto it, and no longer than my
desire leadeth and directeth me.
Molliter austerum studio fallente laborem. -- Ser. ii. Sa. ii. 12.
While earnestnesse for sport or gain,
Sweetly deceives the sowrest pain.
Otherwise, if by any pleasure I be not allured, and if I have other direction than my
genuine and free will, I am nothing worth, and I can never fadge well: for I am at such a
stay, that except for health and life, there is nothing I will take the paines to fret my self
about, or will purchase at so high a rate as to trouble my wits for it, or be constrained
thereunto.
------ Tanti mihi non sit opaci
Omnis arena Tagi, quodgue in mare volvitur aurum. -- Juven. Sat. iii. 54.
So much I weigh not shadow Tagus sande,
Nor gold that roules into the Sea from land.

I am extreamelie lazie and idle, and exceedingly free, both by nature and art. I would as
willingly lend my blood as my care. I have a mind free and altogether her own;
accustomed to follow her own humor. And to this day never had, nor commanding, nor
forced master. I have gon as far, and kept what pace pleased me best: which has
enfeebled and made me unprofitable to serve others, and made me fit and apt, but only
for my self. And as for me, no man ever needed to force this heavy, lither, and idle
nature of mine; for, having even from my birth found my self in such a degree of fortune,
have found occasion to stay there (an occasion notwitlistanding, that a thousand others of
mine acquaintance would have taken as a plancke to pass over to search, to agitation, and
to unquietness.) And as I have sought for nothing, so I have taken nothing.
Non agimur tumidis venus Aquilone secundo,
Non tamen adversis ætatem ducimus austris:
Viribus, ingenio, specte, virtute, loco, re,
Extremi primorum, extremis usque priores. -- Hor. ii. Epist. ii. 201.
With full sailes prosp’rous winde, we do not drive,
Nor yet with winde full in our teeth do live.
In strength, in wit, in virtue, shape, goods, place,
Last of the first, before the last we pace.
I have had no need but of sufficiencie to content my self, which being well taken is
ever a regiment for the mind, equally difficult in all sorts of conditions; and which by use
we see more easily found in want than in plenty; perhaps, because that according to
the course of our other passions, the greedinesse of riches is more sharpened by their uses
than by their need: and the virtue of moderation more rare than that of patience. And I
have had no need but to enjoy those goods quietly, which God of his bounty had bestowed
upon me. I have tasted no kind of tedious trouble. I have seldom mannaged other than
my own business: or if I have, it has been on condition I might do it at my leisure,
and according to my will, committed unto me, by such as trusted me and knew me well,
and would not importune me. For the skilfull rider will reape some service of a restie and
wind-broken jade. My very child-hood. has been directed by a soft, mild, gentle and
free fashion, and ever exempted from rigorous subjection. Al which has endowed me
with a delicate kind of complexion, and made me incapable of any care: So that I love
men should conceal my losses from me and the disorders which concerne me. In the
chapter of my charges and expences, I have set down, what my negligence or
carelessnesse costs me, both to feed and entertaine my self.
------ hæc nempe super sunt,
Quæ dominum fallant, quæ prosint furibus. -- Hor. i. Epist. vi. 45.
This remnant of accompts I have,

Which may deceive Lords, help a Knave.
I love not to know an accompt of what I have, that I may less exactly feel my losses: I
desire those that live with me, where they want affection or good effects, to cozen and pay
me with good apparances. For want of sufficient constancy to endure the importunity of
contrary or crosse accidents, whereunto we are subject; and because I cannot alwaies
keep my self prepared to governe and order my affairs as much as I am able, I foster
this opinion in me, relying wholly upon fortune, and ready to take everything at the worst,
and resolve to bear that worst mildly and patiently. About that only do I busie my self,
and to that end do I direct all my discourses. In any dangerous matter I care not so much
how I may avoide it, and how little it importeth whether I avoid it or no; and what were it
if would continue in it? Being unable to direct events I governe my self; and if they apply
not themselves to me, I apply my self to them: I have no great art to shunne fortune, and
how to scape or force it, and with wisdom to addresse matters to my liking: I have also
less sufferance to endure the sharpe and painefull care which belongeth to that. And the
most toilsome state for me is to be doubtful in matters of weight, and agitated between
fear and hope. To deliberate, be it but in slight matters, does importune me. And I feel
my spirit more perplexed to suffer the motions of doubt and shakings of consultation, than
to be settled and resolved about any accident whatsoever after the chance is once cast.
Fewe passions have troubled my sleepe but of deliberations the least does trouble it. Even
as of high-waies, I willingly seek to avoid the down-hanging and slippery, and take the
beaten-path, though myrie and deepe, so I may go no lower, and there seek I safetie. So
love I pure mishapes, and which exercise and turmoile me no more, after the uncertaintie
of their mending: and which even at the first cast, drive me directly into sufferance.
------ dubiæ plus torquent mala. -- Sen. Agam. act. iii. sc. i. 29.
Evils yet in suspence,
Doe give us more offence.
In events, I carry my self man-like; in the conduct childishly. The horror of a fall does
more hurt me than the blow. The play is not worth the candle. The covetous man has a
worse reckoning of his passion than the poore; and the jealous man than the cuckold. And
it is often less harme for one to loose his farme, than pleade and wrangle for it: the
slowest march is the safest. It is the seate of constancy. Therein you have no need but of
yourselfe. There she takes her footing and wholly resteth upon herself. This example of
a gentleman, whom many have known, has it not some Philosophicall show? This man
having passed all his youth like a good fellow, a jollie companion, a great talker, and a
merry ladd, being now well in years, would needs be married. Remembring himself
how much the subject of cuckoldry had given him cause to speak and scoff at others; to
put himself under covert-baron, he took him a wife from out that place where all men
may have them for money, and with her made his alliance: good morrow whoore, good

morrow cuckold. And there is nothing wherewith he oftener and more openly entertained
such as came unto him, than with this tale: whereby he bridled the secret pratlings of
mockers, and blunted the point of their reproch. Concerning ambitious which is next
neighbor, or rather daughter, to presumption, it had been needfull (to advance me) that
fortune had come to take me by the hand: for to put in my self into any care for an
uncertaine hope, and to submit my self to all difficulties, waiting on such as seek to
thrust themselfe into credite and reputation, in the beginning of their progresse I could
never have done it.
------ Spem pretio non emo, -- Ter. Adel. act. ii. sc. 2.
Expence of present pay
For hope, I do not lay.
I fasten myself on that which I see and hold, and go not far from the shore:
Alter remus aquas, alter tibi radat arenas. -- Prop. iii. El. 23.
Keeps water with one oar,
With the other grate the shore.
Beside,s a man seldom comes to these preferments but in hazarding first his own: and
I am of opinion if that which a man has sufficeth to maintaine the condition wherein he
was borne and brought up, it is folly to let it go upon the uncertainety of encreasing the
same. He to whom fortune refuseth means to settle his estate and establish a quiet and
reposed being is excusable if he cast what he has at hazards since thus as well as thus
necessitie sends him to shift and search out.
[R]apienda rebus in malis preceps via est. -- Sen. Agam. act. ii. sc. i. 47.
A headlong course is best,
When mischiefes are addrest.
And I rather excuse a younger brother to make sale of his inheritance than him who has
the honor of his house in charge, who cannot fall into wants but through his default. I have
by the counsell of my good friends of former times found the way shorter and easier to rid
my self of this desire and keep my self husht:
Cui sit conditio dulcis, sine pulvere palmæ. -- Hor. i. Epist. i. 51.
Who like it well to bear the prise,
But take no toile in any wise.

Judging also rightly of my forces that they were not capable of great matters: and
remembering the saying of Lord Oliver, whilome Chancellor of France, who said that
Frenchmen might be compared to apes, who, climbing up a tree, never cease skipping
from bough to bough, till they come to the highest, where they show their bare tailes.
Turpe est quod nequeat capiti committere pondus,
Et pressum inflexo mox dare terga genu. -- Prop. iii. Ele. viii. 5.
’Tis shame, more than it can well bear, on head to packe,
And thereby soone oppress’t with bended knee flie backe.
Such qualities as are now in me void of reproach, in that age I deemed unprofitable. The
facilitie of my maners had been named faintnesse and weakness, faith and conscience
would have been thought scrupulous and so superstitious: liberty and freedome,
importunate, inconsiderate, and rash. Misfortune serveth to some purpose. It is not amiss
to be born in a much depraved age for in comparison of others, you are judged vertuous,
very cheape. In our dayes he that is but a parricide, or a sacrilegious person, is a man of
honesty and honor.
Nunc si depositum non inficiatur amicus,
Si reddat veterem cum tota æruigine follem,
Prodigiosa fides, et Thuscis digna libellis,
Quæque coronata lustrari debeat agna. -- Juven. Sat. xiii. 60.
If now a friend deny not what was laid in trust,
If wholly he restore th’old bellowes with their rust:
A wondrous trust, to be in chronicles related,
And should with sacrifice, as strange, be expiated.
And never was there time or place wherein more assured and great reward was
proposed unto Princes for goodnesse and justice. The first that shall be advised by these
means to thrust himself into favor and credit, I am much deceived if in part of paiment
he get not the start of his fellowes. Force and violence can do very much, but, never all.
We see merchants, country justices, and artificers to march cheeke by jowl with our
nobility in valor and militarie discipline. They performe honorable combates, both
public and private. They batter and defend townes and cities in our present wars. A
Prince smothereth his commendation amid this throng. Let him shine over others with
humanities, with truth, loyalties temperance, and above all with justice, markes now
adaies rare, unknown, and exiled. It is only the peoples will wherewith he may effect
what he pleaseth: and no other qualities can allure their will so much as they as being the
profitablest for them: Nihil est tam populare quam bonitas. ’Nothing is so popular as

goodnesse is.’ By this proposition I had been a rare great man as by that of certain ages
past I am now a pigmey and popular man; in which it was common. If stronger qualities
did not concurre with all, to see a man temperate in his revenges, mild in revenging of
offences, religious in keeping of his word, neither double nor over tractable, nor applying
his faith to others will, or to every occasion. I would rather let all affairs go to wracke
than breake my word for their avail. For touching this new-found virtue of faining and
dissimulation, which now is so much in credit, I hate it to the death: and of all vices I
find none that so much witnesseth demissenesse and basenesse of heart. It is a coward
and servile humor for a man to disguise and bide himself under a maske, and not dare to
show himself as he is. Thereby our men address themselves to trecherie: being trained to
utter false words, they make no conscience to breake them. A generous mind ought not to
belie his thoughts, but, make show of his inmost parts: there all is good, or at least all is
humane. Aristotle thinkes it an office of magnanimity to hate and love openly, to judge
and speak with all liberty, and never (though prise of truth go on it) to make esteeme
either of the approbation or reprobation of others. Appolonius said it was for servants to
lie, and for free-men to speak truth. It is the chief and fundamentall part of virtue. Shee
must be loved for her own sake. He that speaks truth because he is bound to do so,
and for that he serveth, and that feares not to tell a lie when it little importeth another
man, is not sufficiently true. My mind of her own complexion detesteth falsehood and
hateth to think on it. I feel an inward bashfulnes and a stinging remorse if at any time it
scape me, as sometimes it does if unpremeditated occasions surprise me. A man must not
alwaies say all he knowes, for that were folly: but what a man speaks ought to be
agreeing to his thoughts, otherwise it is impiety. I know not what benefit they expect that
ever faine, and so uncessantly dissemble: except it be not to be beleeved, even when they
speak truly. That may deceive men once or twice, but to make a profession to cary it
away smoothly, and as some of our Princes have done, to boast that if their shirt were
privie to their secret and true cogitations, they would burne it: which was the saying of
ancient Metellus Macedonicus and that he who cannot dissemble cannot reign, serves but
only to warne those who have to deale with them, that what they say is but untruth and
dissimulation: Quo quis versutior et callidior est hoe invisior et suspectior, detracta
opinione probitatis: (Cic. Off. i.) ’The finer-headed and more subtle-brained a man is, the
more is he hated and suspected if once the opinion of honesty be taken from him.’ It were
great simplicity for a man to suffer himself to be mis-led either by the looks or wordes
of him that outwardly professeth what he is not inwardly, as did Tiberius. And I know not
what share such people may challenge in the commerce of men, never producing any
thing that may be taken for good paiment. He who is disloyall to truth is likewise false
against lying. Such as in our days; in the establishing of a Princes dutie, have only
considered the good and felicitie of his affairs, and preferred the same before the respect
of his faith and conscience, would say something to a Prince whose affairs fortune has
so disposed that with once breaking and falsifying of his word he might for ever confirme
and establish them. But it goeth otherwise. A man may more than once come to such a
bargaine. A man during his life concludeth more than one peace or treatie. The
commodity or profit that inviteth them to the first disloyalty (and daily some offer

themselves, as to all other trecheries), sacrileges, murders, rebellions, treasons, are
undertaken for some kind of profit. But this first gain brings ever infinite losses and
dangers with it: casting this Prince from-out all commerce and means of negotiation by
the example of this infidelitie. Soliman of the Ottomans race (a race little regarding the
keeping of promises or performance of covenants), at what time he caused his army to
land at Otranto (I being then but a child), having known that Mercurin of Gratinara,
and the inhabitants of Castro, were detained prisoners after the town was yielded,
contrary to that which by his captaines had been capitulated with them, he sent word they
should be released, and that having otherweighty enterprises in hand in that country, such
disloyalty, although it had apparance of great and present benefit, yet in time to come it
would bring a distrust and reproch of infinite prejudice. As for me, I had rather be
importunate and indiscreet than a flatterer and a dissembler. I allow a man may
entermingle some point of fiercenesse and wilfulnesse to keep himself so entire and
open as I am, without consideration of others. And me seems I become a little more
free where I should be less, and that by the opposition of respect I grow earnest. It may
also be that for want of art I follow my own nature. Presenting to the greater sort the
very same licence of speech and boldnes of countenance that I bring from my house: I
perceive how much it inclineth towards indiscretion and incivilitie. But although I be so
fashioned, my spirit is not sufficiently yielding to avoid a sudden question, or to scape it
by some winding, nor to dissemble a truth, nor have I memory able to continue it so
feigned, nor assurance sufficient to maintaine it; and I play the braggard through
feeblenesse. And therefore I apply my self to ingenuitie, and ever to speak truth and
what I think; both by complexion and by intention; leaving the success thereof unto
fortune. Aristippus said that the chiefest commoditie he reaped by philosophy was, that he
spake freely and sincerely to all men. Memory is an instrument of great service, and
without which, judgement wil hardly discharge his duty, wherof I have great want. What a
man will propose unto me, he must do it by peecemeales: for, to answer to a discourse
that has many heads, lieth not in my power. I cannot receive a charge, except I have my
writing tables about me: and if I must remember a discourse of any consequence, be it of
any length, I am driven to this vile and miserable necessitie, to learne every word I must
speak by rote; otherwise I should never do it well or assuredly, for fear my memory
should in my greatest need faile me; which is very hard unto me, for I must have three
hours to learne three verses. Moreover, in any long discourse, the liberty or authority to
remoove the order, to change a word, uncessantly altering the matter, makes it more
difficult to be confirmed in the authors memory. And the more I distrust it, the more it
troubleth me. It serveth me better by chance, and I must carelesly sollicite her, for if I urge
her, she is astonished; and if it once beginne to waver, the more I sound her, the more
entangled and intricate she proveth. She wil wait upon me when she list, not when I
please. And what I feel in my memories I feel in many other parts of mine. I eschew
cornmandement, duty, and compulsion. What I do easily and naturally, if I resolve to do
it by express and prescribed appointment, I can then do it no more. Even in my body,
those parts that have some liberty, and more particular jurisdiction, do sometimes refuse
to obey me if at any time I appoint and enjoine them to do me some necessarie services.

This forced and tyrannical preordinance does reject them, and they either for spight or
fear shrinke and are quailed. Being once in a place where it is reputed a barbarous
discourtesy not to pledge those that drinke to you, where although I were used with al
liberty, in favor of certain ladies that were in company, according to the fashion of the
country, I would needs play the good fellow. But it made us all mery; for the threats and
preparation, that I should force my self beyond my natural custom, did in such sort stop
and stuffe my throat, that I was not able to swallow one drop, and was barr’d of drinking
all the repast. I found my self glutted and ful of drink by the overmuch swilling that my
imagination had fore-conceived. This effect is more apparant in those whose imagination
is more vehement and strong: yet it is natural: and there is no man but shall sometimes
have a feeling of it. An excellent archer being condemned to death, was offered to have
his life saved if he would but show any notable trial of his profession, refused to make
proofe of it; fearing lest the contention of his will should make him to misse-direct his
hand, and that in lieu of saving his life, he might also lose the reputation he had gotte in
shooting in a bow. A man whose thoughts are busie about other matters, shall very near
within an inch keep and alwaies hit one self same number and measure of paces, in a
place where he walketh; but if heedily he endeavor to measure and count them, he shall
find that what he did by nature and chance, he cannot do it so exactly by desseign. My
library (which, for a countrey library, may pass for a very fair one) is seated in a corner
of my house: if any thing come into my mind, that either I must go seek or write in it,
for fear I should forget it in crossing of my court, I must desire some other body to
remember the same for me. If speaking, I embolden my self never so little to digresse
from my discourse, I do ever lose it; which makes me to keep my self in my speech,
forced, near and close. Those that serve me, I must ever call them either by their office or
countrey: for I find it very hard to remember names. Well may I say it has three
syllables, that its sound is harsh, or that it beginneth or endeth with such a letter. And
should I live long, I doubt not but I might forget my own name, as some others have
done heretofore. Messala Corvinus lived two yeeres without any memory at all, which is
also reported of George Trapezoncius. And for my own interest, I do often ruminate
what manner of life theirs was, and whether wanting that part, I shall have sufficient to
maintaine my self in any good sort: which looking near unto I fear that this defect, if it
be perfe ct, shall lose all the functions of my soul.
Plenus rimarum sum, hac atque illac perfluo. -- Ter. Eun. act. i. sc. 2.
I am so full of holes, I cannot hold,
I run out ev’ry way, when tales are told.
It has often befallen me to forget the word which but three hours before I had either
given or received of another, and to forget where I had laid my purse; let Cicero say what
he list. I helpe my self to loose what I particularly locke up. Memoria certe non modo
philosophiam, sed omnis vitæ usum, omnesque artes una maxime continet: ’Assuredly
memory alone, of all other things, compriseth not only philosophy, but the use of our

whole life, and all the sciences.’ Memorie is the receptacle and the case of knowledge.
Mine being so weake, I have no great cause to complain if I know but little. I know the
names of Arts in general, and what they treate of, but nothing further, I turn and tosse
over bookes, but do not studie them; what of them remaines in me is a thing which I no
longer acknowledge to be any bodies else. Only by that has my judgement profited: and
the discourses and imaginations wherewith it is instructed and trained up. The authours,
the place, the words; and other circumstances, I sodainly forget: and am so excellent in
forgetting, that as much as any thing else I forget my own writings and compositions.
Yea, my own sayings are every hand-while alleadged against my self, when God wot I
perceive it not. He that would know of me, whence or from whom the verses or examples
which here I have hudled up are taken, should greatly put me to my shifts, and I could
hardly tell it him. Yet have I not begged them, but at famous and very well knowen gates,
which though they were rich in themselves, did never please me, unless they also came
from rich and honorable hands, and that authority concurre with reason. It is no great
marvell if my book follow the fortune of other bookes, and my memory forgo or forget
as well what I write as what I read: and what I give as well as what I receive. Besides the
defect of memory, I have others, which much further my ignorance. My wit is dull and
slow, the least cloud dimmeth it, so that (for example sake) I never proposed riddle unto it
(were it never so easy) that it was able to expound. There is no subtilitie so vain but
confounds me. In games wherein wit may bear a part, as of chesse, of card, of tables, and
others, I could never conceive but the common and plainest draughts. My apprehension is
very sluggish and gloomy; but what it once holdeth the same it keepeth fast: and for the
time it keepes it, the same it embraceth generally, strictly, and deepely. My sight is
quick, sound, perfect, and far-seeing, but easily wearied if much charged or emploied.
By which occasion I can have no great commerce with books but by others service which
read unto me. Plinie the younger can instruct those tha thave tried it, how much this fore-
slowing importeth those that give themselves to this occupation. There is no spirit so
wretched or so brutish wherein some particular facultie is not seen to shine; and none so
low buried, but at one hole or other it will sally out sometimes. And how it commeth to
pass that a mind blinde and slumbering in all other things, is in some particular effects,
lively, clear, and excellent, a man must inquire of cunning masters. But those are the
fair spirits which are universall, open and readie to all, if not instructed, at least to be
instructed. Which I alleage to accuse mine: for, be it either through weakenesse, or
retchlessenesse (and to be carelesse of that which lieth at our feet, which we have in our
hands, which neerest concerneth the use of life, is a thing far from my dogma or
doctrine) there is none so simple or so ignorant as mine, in diverse such common matters,
and of which, without imputation or shame, a man should never be ignorant; whereof I
must needs tell some examples. I was borne and brought up in the countrie, and amidst
husbandry: I have since my predecessours quit me the place and possession of the goods I
enjoy, both business and husbandry in hand, I cannot yet cast account either with penne
or counters. There are diverse of our French coines I know not: nor can I distinguish of one
graine from another, be it in the field or in the barne, unless it be very apparant: nor do I
scarcely know the difference betweene the cabige or letuce in my garden. I understand not

the names of the most usual tooles about husbandrie, nor of the meanest principles of
tillage, which most children know. I was never skilfull in mechanicall arts, nor in traffike
or knowledge of merchandise, nor in the diversitie and nature of fruits, wines, or cates, nor
can I make a hawke, physike a horse, or teach a dogge. And since I must make ful show of
my shame or ignorance, it is not yet a moneth since that I was found to be ignorant wherto
leven served to make bread withal; or what it was to cunne wine. The Athenians were
anciently wont to think him very apt for the mathematikes, that could cunningly order or
take up a faggot of brushe wood. Verily a man might drawe a much contrary conclusion
from me: for let me have all that may belong to a kitchin, yet shall I be ready to starve for
hunger. By these parts of my confession one may imagine diverse others to my cost and
detriment. But however I make myself known, alwaies provided it be as I am, indeed
I have my purpose. And I excuse not my self that I dare set down in writing so base and
frivolous matters as these. The basenesse of the subject forceth me thereunto. Let who so
list accuse my project, but not my progresse. So it is that without being warned of others I
see very well how little this weigheth or is worth, and I perceive the fondnesse of my
purpose. It is sufficient that my judgement is not dismayed or distracted, whereof these be
the Essaies.
Nasutus sis usque licet, sis denique nasus
Quantum noluerit ferre rogatus Atlas:
Et possis ipsum tu deridere Latinum,
Non potes, in nugas dicere plura meas,
Ipse ego quam dixi; quid dentem dente juvabit
Rodere? carne opus est, si satur esse velis
Ne perdas operam, qui se mirantur, in illos
Virus habe, nos hæc novimus es se nihil. Mart. xiii. Epig. ii. 1.
Suppose you were long-nos’d, suppose such nose you weare
As Atlas, if you should intreat him, would not bear,
That you in flouting old Latinus can be fine.
Yet can you say no more about these toyes of mine,
Then I have said; what boote, tooth with a tooth to whet?
You must have fleshe, if you to glut your self be set.
Loose not your paines; ’gainst them who on themselves are doting
Keepe you your sting: we know these things of ours are nothing.
I am not bound to utter no follies so I be not deceived to know them: and wittingly to erre
is so ordinary in me that I erre not much otherwise; and seldom erre casually. It is a
small matter to yield the foolish actions unto the rashnesse of my humors since I cannot
warrant my self ordinarily to yield them the vicious. Being at Barleduc I saw for the
commendation of Renate the King of Sicilies memory a picture which with his own
hands he ha d made of himself, presented unto our King Francis the second: why is it not
as lawfull for every man else to portray himself with his pen, as it was for him to do it

with a pensell? I wil not then forget this blemish, unfit to be seen of all. That is
irresolution, a most incommodious defect in the negotiation of worldly affairs: I cannot
resolve in matters admitting doubtfulnesse:
Ne si, ne no, nel cuor mi suona intiero. -- Petr. pa. i. son. cxxxviii. 8.
Nor indeed, nor nay, sounds clearely in my heart.
I can maintaine an opinion, but not make choice of it: for in Humane things what side
soever a man leaneth on, many apparences prevent themselves unto us, which confirm us
in them: and Chrysippus the Philosopher was wont to say that he would learne nothing
else of his maisters, Zeno and Cleanthes, but their doctrines simply: for proofes and
reasons he would find enough of himself. Let me turn to what side I will, I ever find
sufficient matter and liklyhood to keep my self unto it. Thus keep I doubt and liberty to
my self, to chuse, until occasion urge me, and then (to confesse the truth), as the
common saying is, I cast my feather to the wind, and yield to fortunes mercy. A very
light inclination and a slender circumstance carries me away.
Dum in dubio est animus paulo momento huc atque illuc impellitur. -- Ter.
And. act. i. sc. 3.
While mind is in suspence, with small ado,
’Tis hither, thither, driven fro and to.
The uncertainty of my judgement is in many occurrences so equally balanced as I
would willingly compromise it to the deciding of chance and of the dice. And I note with
great consideration of our humane imbecilities the examples which the history of God it
self has left us of this use, to remit the determination of elections in doubtfull matters
unto fortune and hazard. Sors cecidit super Matthiam: (Act. i. 26) ’The lot fell upon
Matthias.’Humane reason is a two-edged dangerous sword; even in Socrates his hand, her
most inward and familiar friend, marke what a many-ended staffe it is. So am I only fit to
follow, and am easily carried away by the throng. I do not greatly trust my own
strength, to undertake to command or to lead. I rejoice to see my steps traced by others. If
I must run the hazard of an uncertaine choice, I would rather have it be under such a one
who is more assured of his opinions, and more wedded to them, then I am of mine; the
foundation and platforme of which I find to be very slippery; yet am I not very easy to
change, forasmuch as I perceive a like weaknesse in contrary opinions. Ipsa consuetudo
assentiendi periculosa esse videtur, et lubrica: (Cic. Acad. Qu. iv.) ’The very custom of
assenting seems hazardous and slippery:’ Namely in politick affairs, wherein is a large
field open to all motions, and to contestation:
Iusta pari premitur veluti cum pondere libra,

Prona nec hac plus parte sedet, nec surgit ab illa. -- Tibulla iv. hero. v. 41.
As when an even skale with equall weight is peized,
Nor falles it down this way, or is it that way raised.
As for example, Machiavels discourses were very solid for the subject: yet has it been
very easy to impugne them, and those that have done have left no less facilitie to
impugne theirs. A man might ever find answeres enough to such an argument, both
rejoynders, double, treble, quadruple, with this infinite contexture of debates, that our
petty-foggers have wrye-drawne and wrested as much as ever they could in favor of
their pleas and processes:
Cædimur, et totidem plagis consumimus hostem. -- Hor. ii. Epist. ii. 97.
We by our foes are beaten, if not slain,
We with as many strokes waste them again;
Reasons having no other good ground than experience, and the diversity of humane
events presenting us with infinite examples of all manner of formes. A wise man of our
times says that where our Almanakes say warme should a man say cold, and in lieu of
drie, moyst; and ever set down the contrary of what they foretell; were he to lay a wager
of one or others successes he would not care what side he took, except in such things as
admit no uncertaintie; as to promise extreme heat at Christmas, and exceeding cold at
Midsomer. The like I think of these politike discourses. What part soever you are put
unto, you have as good a game as your fellow: provided you affront not the apparant and
plain principles. And therefore (according to my humor) in public affairs there is no
course so bad (so age and constancy be joined unto it) that is not better then change and
alteration. Our manners are exceedingly corrupted, and with a marvellous inclination
bend towards worse and worse. Of our laws and customs many are barbarous, and
diverse monstrous; notwithstanding, by reason of the difficultie to reduce us to better
estate, and of the danger of this subversion, if I could fix a pegge into our wheel and stay
it where it now is, I would willingly do it.
-----nunquam adeo foedis adeoque pudendis
Ultimur exemplis, ut non peiora suiper sint. -- Juven. Sat. viii. 183.
Examples of so filthy shamefull kind
We never use, but worse remaines behind.
Instabilitie is the worst I find in our state, and that our laws, no more than our garments,
can take no setled form. It is an easy matter to accuse a state of imperfection, since all
mortal things are full of it. As easy is it to beget in a people a contempt of his ancient

observances: No man ever undertook it, but came to an end: But to establish a better state
in place of that which is condemned and raced out, diverse who have attempted it have shro
nk under the burden. Touching my conduct, my wisdom has small share therein. I am
very easily to be directed by the worlds public order. Oh happy people that does what is
commanded, better then they which command, without vexing themselves about causes;
which suffer themselves gently to be rowled on, according to the heavens rowling.
Obedience is never pure and quiet in him who talketh, pIeadeth, and contendeth. In some
(to return to my self) the only matter for which I make some accompt of my self is that
wherein never man did think himself defective. My commendation is vulgar, common,
and popular; for who ever thought he wanted wit? It were a proposition which in itself
would imply contradiction. It is an infirmity that is never where it is seen, it is very
strong and fast-holding, but yet pierced and dissipated by the first beame of the patients
sight, as does the sunnes raies scatter and disperse a gloomie mist. For a man to accuse
himself were to excuse himself of that subject; and to condemne himself, an absolving
of himself. There was never so base a porter, nor so silly a woman, but thought he had
sufficient wit for his provision. We easily know in others the advantage of courage, of
bodily strength, of experience of disposition, and of beauties but we never yield the
advantage of judgement to any body: and the reasons which part from the simple’natural
discourse in others, we th inke that had we but looked that way, we had surely found
them. The skill, the knowledge, the stile, and such like parts which we see in strange
workes, we easily perceive whether they exceed ours; but the meere productions of wit
and understanding every man deemeth it lyeth in him to meete with the very like, and does
hardly perceive the weight and difficultie of it, except (and that very scarcelv) in an
extreme and incomparable distance. And he that should clearely see the height of a
strangers judgement, would come and bring his unto it. Thus is it a kind of exercising
whereof a man may hope but for meane commendation and small praise, and a manner of
composition of little or no harme at all. And then for whom do you write? The wiser sort,
unto whom belongeth bookish jurisdiction, know no other price but of doctrine, and avow
no other proceeding in our wits but that of erudition and art. If you have mistaken one
Scipio for an other, what of any worth have you left to speak of? He that is ignorant of
Aristotle (according to them) he is therewithall ignorant of himself. Popular and shallow-
beaded mindes cannot perceive the grace or comelinesse, nor judge of a smooth and
quaint discourse. Now these two kindes possess the world. The third, unto whose share
you fall, of regular wits, and that are strong of themselves, is so rare that justly it has
neither name or rank amongst us; he loses halfe his time that does aspire or endeavour to
please it. It is commonly said that the justest portion nature has given us of the graces is
that of sense and understanding: for there is no man but is contented with the share she
has allotted him. Is it not reason? He who should see beyond that, should see further then
his sight. I persuade my self to have good and sound opinions: but who is not so
persuaded of his own: One of the best trials I have of it is the small esteeme I make of
myself: for had they not been well assured they would easily have suffered themselves to
be deceived by the affection I bear unto my self, singular, as he who bring it almost all
unto my self, and that spill but a little besides. All that which others distribute thereof

unto an infinite number of acquaintances, to their glory and greatness, I refer to the
repose of my spirit and to myself. What else where escapes of it is not properly by the
appointment of my discourse:
----- mihi nempe valere et vivere doctus.
Well learn’d in what concerneth me,
To live, and how in health to be.
As for my opinions, I find them infinitely bold and constant to condemne mine
insufficiencies. And to say truth, it is a subject whereabout I exercise my judgement as
much as about any other. The world looks ever for right, I turn my sight inward, there I
fix it, there I ammuse it. Every man looks before himself, I looke within my self: I
have no busines but with my self. I uncessantly consider, controle and taste my self:
other men go ever else where if they think well on it: they go ever foreward.
------ nemo in sese tentat descendere. -- Pers. Sat. iv. 32.
No man attempteth this Essay,
Into himself to find the way.
As for me, I roule me unto my self. This capacitie of sifting out the truth, what and
however it be in me, and this free humor I have, not very easily to subject my beliefe, I
owe especially unto my self, for the most constant and general imaginations I have are
those which (as one would say) were borne with me: they are natural unto me, and wholy
mine. I produced them raw and simple, of a hardy and strong production, but somewhat
troubled and imperfect: which I have since established and fortified by the authority of
others, and by the sound examples of ancients, with whom I have found my self
conformable in judgement: those have assured me of my hold-fast of them, and have
given me both the enjoying and possession thereof more absolute and more clear. The
commendation which every man seekes after for a vivacitie and promptitude of wit, I
chalenge the same by the order of a notable and far-sounding action, or of some
particular sufficiencie; I pretend it by the order, correspondencie, and tranquillitie of
opinions and customs. Omnino si quidquam est decorum, nihil est profecto magis quam
æquabilitas universæ vitæ, tum singularum actionum: quam conservare non possis, sit
aliorum nat uram imitans, omittas tuam: (Cic. Off. i.) ’Clearely if any thing be decent for
a man, nothing is more than an even carriage and equability of his whole life, and every
action therein: which you cannot uphold if following the nature of others you let pass
your own.’ Behold here then how far forth I find my self guilty of that first part I said
to be in the vice of presumption. Concerning the second, which consisteth in not
esteeming sufficiently of others, I wot not whether I can so well excuse my self; for
whatsoever it cost me, I intend to speak what is of it. It may be the continuall commerce I

have with ancient humors, and the idea of those rich mindes of former ages does bring
me out of liking and distaste both of others and of my self, or that in truth we live in an
age which produces things but meane and indifferent. So it is that I know nothing worthy
any great admiration. Also I know not many men so familiarly as I should to be able to
judge of them: and those with whom the quality of my condition does ordinarily make me
conversant are for the most part such as have little care for the manuring of the soul, and
to whom nothing is proposed for chief felicitie but honor, and for absolute perfection
but valor. Whatsoever I see or beauteous or worthy in any other man, I willingly
commend and regard; indeed, and I often endeare my self with what I think of it, and allow
my self to lie so far forth: for I cannot invent a false subject. I willingly witness with
my friends what I find praise-worthy in them. And of an inch of valor, I willingly make
an inch and a halfe; but to lend them qualities they have not, I cannot; and openly to
defend their imperfections, I may not: indeed, be they mine enemies, I shall sincerely give
them their due in witnessing their worth or honor. My affection may change; my
judgement never. And I confound not my quarrell with other circumstances that are
impertinent and belong not unto it. And I am so jealous of the liberty of my judgement,
that for what passion soever I can hardly quit it. I wrong my self more in lying than him
of whom I lie. This commendable and generous custom of the Persian nation is much
noted; they speak very honourably and justly of their mortal enemies, and with those
with whom they were at deadly fude and war, so far forth as the, merit of their virtue
deserved. I know diverse men who have sundry noble and worthy parts; some wit, some
courage, some dexteritie, some conscience, some a readinesse in speech, some one
science, and some another: but of a great man in general, and that has so many excellent
parts together, or but one in such a degree of excellencie as he may thereby be admired,
or but compared to those of former ages whom we honor, my fortune has not permitted
me to see one. And the greatest I ever knew living (I meane of natural parts of the mind,
and the best borne) was Stephanusde la Boetie. Verily it was a compleat mind, and who
set a good face and showed a fair countenance upon all matters; a mind after the old
stampe, and which had fortune therewith been pleased, would no doubt have brought
forth wondrous effects, having by skill and study added very much to his rich natural
gifts. But I know not how it comes to pass, and surely it does so, there is, as much vanity
and weakenesse of understanding found in those that professe to have most sufficiencie,
that will entermeddle with learned vocations, and with the charges that depend of books,
as in any sort of people; whether it be because there is more required and expected at their
hands, and common faults cannot be excused in them, or that the self-opinion of
knowledge emboldeneth them the more to produce and discover themselves over-forward,
whereby they lose and betray themselves. As an artificer doeth more manifest his
sottishnesse in a rich piece of work which he has in hand, if foolishly and against the
rules of his trade he seek to apply it and entermeddle, than in a vile and base one; and
men are more offended at a fault or oversight in a statue of gold than in one of clay. These
do as much when they set foorth things which in themselves and in their place would be
good; for they employ them without discretion, honouring their memory at the cost and
charge of their understanding: and doing honor to Cicero, to Galen, to Ulpian, and to

Saint Jerome to make themselves ridiculous. I willingly return to this discourse of the
fondnesse of our institution: whose aime has been to make us not good and wittie, but
wise and learned. She has attained her purpose. It has not taught us to follow virtue and
embrace wisdom: but made an impression in us of its Etymologie and derivation. We can
decline virtue, yet can we not love it. If we know not what wisdom is by effect and
experience, we know it by prattling and by rote. We are not satisfied to know the race,
the alliances, and the pedigrees of our neighbors, but we wil have them to be our friends
and contract both conversation and intelligence with them: It has taught us the
definitions, the divisions and distinctions of virtue, as of the surnames and branches of a
genealogie, without having other care to contract practise of familiaritie or private
acquaintance betweene us and it. She has appointed us for our learning, not bookes that
have sounder and truer opinions, but volumes that speak the best Greeke or Latine; and
amongst her choice words has made the vainest humors of antiquitie to glide into our
conceits. A good institution changeth judgement and manners, as it hapned to Polemon.
This dissolute young Græcian going one day by chance to hear a lecture of Xenocrates,
where he not only marked the eloquence and sufficiencie of the reader, and brought not
home the knowledge of some notable thing, but a more apparant and solid fruit, which
was the sodaine change and amendment of his former life. Who ever heard such an effect
of our discipline?
------ faciasne quod olim
Nutatus Polemon, ponas insignia morbi
Fasciolas, cubital, focalia? Potus ut ille
Dicitur ex collo furtim carpsisse coronas,
Postquam est impransi correptus voce magistri? -- Hor. Ser. ii. Sat. iii.
253.
Can you do as did Polemon reformed,
Cast-off your sicknes signes, which you deformed,
Your bolsters, mufflers, swathes? As he drink-linde,
His drunken garland covertly declinde,
By speech of fasting reader disciplinde?
The least disdainful condition of men, me thinkes, is that which through simplicitie
holds the last rank, and offereth us more regular commerce. The customs and discourses
of countrie-clownish-men, I find them commonly to be more conformable and better
disposed, according to the true prescription of Philosophie, then are those of our
Philosophers. Plus sapit vulqus, quia tantum, quantum opus cut, sapit: ’The vulgar is the
wiser, because it is but as wise as it must needs.’ The worthiest men I have judged by
eternall apparances (for, to judge them after my fashion, they should be sifted nearer)
concerning war and military sufficiencie have been, the Duke of Guise, that died before
Orleans, and the whilom Marshal Strozzi: For men extraordinarily sufficient and endowed
with no vulgar virtue, Oliver and L’Hospitall, both great Chancelors of France. Poesie

has likewise in mine opinion had her vogue and credit in our age. We have store of
cunning and able men in that profession: Aurate, Beza, Buchanan, L’Hospital, Mont-dore,
and Turnebus. As for French-men, I think they have attained the highest degree of
perfection that can or ever shall be, and in those parts wherein Ronsart and excellent
Bellay have written, I think they are not far short of the ancient perfection. Adrianus
Turnebus knew more, and better what he knew, than any man in his age or of many ages
past. The lives of the late Duke of Alva and our Constable Mommorencie have been very
noble, and have had sundrie rare resemblancies of fortune. But the worthily-fair and
glorious death of the last in the full sight of Paris and of his King, for their service against
his nearest friends and alliance in the front of an army, victorious through his conduct of
it, and with an handstroke in that old age of his, deserveth in mine opinion to be placed
and registred amongst the most renouned and famous accidents of my times. As also the
constant goodness, the mildnes in behaviour, and conscionable fecility of Monsieur de la
Noue in such an injustice of armed factions (a very schoole of treason, of inhumanitie and
brigandage) wherein he was ever brought up, a worthie and famous man of war and
most experienced in his profession . I have greatly pleased my self in publishing in
sundrie places the good hope I have of Marie de Gournay le Jars, my daughter in alliance,
and truely of me beloved with more then a fatherly love, and as one of the best parts of my
being enfeofed in my home and solitariness. There is nothing in the world I esteem more
then her. If child-hoode may presage any future successes her mind shal one day be
capable of many notable things, and amongst others, of the perfection of this thrice-sacred
amitie whereunto we read not, her sex could yet attaine; the sinceritie and soliditie of her
demeanors are therein already sufficient; her kind affection towards me is more than
superabounding and such indeede as nothing more can be wished unto it, so that the
apprehension which she has of my aproching end, by reason of the fiftie five years
wherein her hap has been to know me, would somewhat less cruelly trouble her. The
judgement she made of my first Essayes, being a woman of this age so yong, alone where
she dwelleth, and the exceeding vehemence wherewith she loved me and long time by
the only esteem which before ever she saw me, she had by them conceived of me she
desired me, is an accident most worthy consideration. Other vertues have had little or no
currantnesse at all in this age: but valor is become popular by reason of our civill wars,
and in this part there are minds found amongst us very constant, even to perfection and in
great number, so that the choice is impossible to be made. See here what hitherto I have
knowen of any extraordinary and not common greatness.




Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XVIII: OF GIVING THE LIE






CHAPTER XVIII: OF GIVING THE LIE
EA but, will some tell me, this design in a man to make himself a
subject to write of might be excused in rare and famous men, and who
by their reputation had bred some desire in others of their
acquaintance. It is true, I confesse it, and I know that a handicraftsman
will scarcely looke off his work to gaze upon an ordinary man:
whereas to see a notable great person come into a town, he will leave
both work and shop. It ill-beseemeth any man to make himself knowen, only he
excepted that has somewhat in him worthy imitation, and whose life and opinions may
stand as a pattern to all. Cæsar and Xenophon have had wherewithall to ground and
establish their narration in the greatness of their deedes as on a just and solid
groundwork. So are the jornall bookes of Alexander the great, the Commentaries which
Augustus, Cato, Brutus, Sylla, and diverse others had left of their gests, greatly to be
desired. Such mens images are both beloved and studied, be they either in brasse or stone.
This admonition is most true, but it concerneth me very little.

Non recito cuiquam: nisi amicis, idque rogatus,
Non ubivis, coramve quibuslibet. In medio qui
Scripta foro recitant sunt multi, quique lavantes. -- Hor. Ser. i. Sat. iv. 73.
My writings I read not, but to my friends, to any,
Nor each-where, nor to all, nor but desir’d, yet many
In market-place read theirs, In bathes, in barbers-chaires.
I erect not here a statue to be set up in the marketplace of a town, or in a church, or in
any other public place:
Non equidem hoc studeo bullatis ut mihi nugis
Pagina turgescat: ---- Pers. Sat. v. 19.
I studie not, my written leaves should grow
Big-swolne with bubled toyes, which vain breathes blow.
Secreti loquimur. --- 21.
We speak alone,
Or one to one.
It is for the corner of a Library, or to ammuse a neighbour, a kinsman, or a friend of mine
withall, who by this image may happily take pleasure to renew acquaintance and to
reconverse with me. Others have been emboldned to speak of themselves because they
have found worthy add rich subject in themselves. 1, contrariwise, because I have found
mine so barren and so shallow, that it cannot admit suspition of ostentation. I willingly
judge other mens actions; of mine by reason of their nullity, I give small cause to judge. I
find not so much good in my self, but I may speak of it without blushing. Oh what
contentment were it unto me to hear somebody that would relate the custom, the visage,
the countenance, the most usual words, and the fortunes of my ancestors. Oh, how
attentively would I listen unto it. Verily it were an argument of a bad nature, to seem to
despise the very pictures of our friends and predecessors, the fashion of their garments and
arms. I keep the writing, the manuall seale, and a peculiar sword: and I reserve still in
my cabinet certain long switches or wands which my father was wont to carry in his
hand. Paterna vestis et annulus, tanto charior est posteris, quanto erga parentes maior
affectus: ’The fathers garment and his ring is so much more esteemed of his successors, as
their affection is greater towards their progenitors.’ Notwithstanding if my posterity be of
another mind, I shall have wherewith to be avenged, for they cannot make so little
accompt of me, as then I shal do of them. All the commerce I have in this with the world
is that I borrow the instruments of their writing, as more speedy and more easy; in
requitall whereof I may perhaps hinder the melting of some piece of butter in the

market or a grocer from selling an ounce of pepper.
Ne toga cordyllis, ne penula desit olivis. -- Mart. xiii. Epig. i. I.
Lest fish-fry should a fit gowne want,
Lest cloakes should be for olives scant.
Et laxas scombris sæpe dabo tunicas. -- Catul. Epig. Eleg. xxvii.8.
To long-tail’d mackrels often I,
Will side-wide (paper) cotes apply.
And if it happen no man read me, have I lost my time to have entertained my self so
many idle hours about so pleasing and profitable thoughts? In framing this pourtraite by
my self, I have so often been faine to frizle and trimme me, that so I might the better
extract my self that the patterne is thereby confirmed, and in some sort formed. Drawing
my self for others, I have drawne my self with purer and better colours than were my
first. I have no more made my book then my book has made me. A book
consubstantiall to his author: a peculiar and fit occupation. A member of my life. Not of
an occupation and end strange and forraine, as all other bookes. Have I mis-spent my time
to have taken an account of my self so continually and so curiously? For those who only
run themselves over by fantasie, and by speech for some hours, examine not themselves
so primely and exactly, nor enter they into themselves, as he does who makes his studie
his work, and occupation of it; who with all his might, and with all his credit, engageth
himself to a register of continuance. The most delicious pleasures, though inwardly
digested, shun to leave any trace of themselves, and avoide the sight not only of the
people, but of any other. How often has this busines diverted me from tedious and
yrksome cogitations? (and all frivolous ones must be deemed tedious and yrksome).
Nature has endowed us with a large faculty to entertaine ourselves apart, and often
calleth us unto it: to teach us that partly we owe ourselves unto society, but in the better
part unto ourselves. To the end I may in some order and project marshall my fantasie
even to dote and keep it from loosing and straggling in the aire, there is nothing so good
as to give it a body and register so many idle imaginations as present themselves unto it. I
listen to my humors and hearken to my conceits, because I must enroule them. How
often, being grieved at some action, which civility and reason forbad me to with stand
openly, have I disgorged my self upon them here, not-without an intent of public
instruction? And yet these poeticall rods,
Zon dessus l’oeil, zon sur le groin,
Zon sur le dos du Sagoin,
are also better imprinted upon paper than upon the quick flesh; what if I lend mine ears

somewhat more attentively unto bookes, sith I but watch if I can filch something from
them wherewith to enammell and uphold mine? I never studie to make a book, yet have I
somewhat studied, because I had already made it (if to nibble or pinch, by the head or feet,
now one Authour, and then another be in any sort to study), but nothing at all to form my
opinions. Yea, being long since formed to assist, to second, and to serve them. But whom
shall we believe, speaking of himself in this corrupted age? since there are few or none
who may believe speaking of others, where there is less interest to lie. The first part of
customs corruption is the banishment of truth: for, as Pindarus said, to be sincerely true
is the beginning of a great virtue; and the first article Plato requireth in the Governor of
his Commonwealth. Now adaies, that is not the truth which is true, but that which is
persuaded to others. As we call money not only that which is true and good, but also the
false; so it be currant. Our nation is long since taxed with this vice. For Salvianus
Massiliensis, who lived in the time of Valentinian the Emperor, says that amongst
French-men to lie and forsweare is no vice, but a manner of speach. He that would
endeare this testimony might say, it is now rather deemed a virtue among them. Men
frame and fashion themselves unto it as to an exercise of honor; for, dissimulation is one
of the notablest qualities of this age. Thus have I often considered whence this custom
might arise, which we observe so religiously, that we are more sharpely offended with the
reproach of this vice, so ordinary in us, than with any other; and that it is the extremest
injury may be done us in words, to upbraid and repoach us with a lie. Therein I find that it
is natural for a man to defend himself most from such defects as we are most tainted
with. It seems that if we but show a motion of revenge, or are but moved at the
accusation, we in some sort discharge ourselves of the blame of imputation; if we have it
in effect, at least we condemne it in apparance. May it not also be that this reproch seems
to enfold cowardice and faintnesse of hart? Is there any more manifest than for a man to
eate and deny his own word? What, to deny his word wittingly. To lie is a horrible filthy
vice; and which an ancient writer setteth forth very shamefully, when he says that
whosoever lieth witnesseth that he contemneth God and therewithall feareth men. It is
impossible more richly to represent the horrour, the vilenesse and the disorder of it: for,
what can be imagined so vile and base as to be a coward towards men and a boaster
towards God? Our intelligence being only conducted by the way of the word: whoso
falsifieth the same betraieth public society. It is the only instrument by means whereof
our wils and thoughts are communicated: it is the interpretour of our soules: If that faile
us, we hold ourselves no more, we enter-know one another no longer. If it deceive us, it
breaketh al our commerce, and dissolveth al bonds of our policies. Certain Nations of the
new Indiæs (whose names we need not declare, because they are no more, for the
desolation of this conquest has extended itself to the absolute abolishing of names and
ancient knowledge of places, with a marvellous and never the like heard example) offered
humane blood unto their Gods, but no other than that which was drawne from their
tongues and ears for an expiation of the sinne of lying as well heard as pronounced. That
good fellow Græcian said children were dandled with toies, but men with words.
Concerning the sundry fashions of our giving the lie, and the laws of our honor in that
and the changes they have received, I wil refer to another time to speak what I think and

know of it, and if I can I will in the meane time learne at what time this custom took his
beginning, so exactly to weigh and precisely to measure words, and tie our honor to
them: for it is easy to judge that it was not anciently amongst the Romans and Græcians.
And I have often thought it strange to see them wrong and give one another the lie, and
yet never enter into quarrell. The laws of their duty took some other course than ours.
Cæsar is often called a thiefe, and sometimes a drunkard to his face. We see the liberty of
their invectives, which they write one against another: I meane the greatest Chieftaines
and Generals in war, of one and other nation, where words are only retorted and
revenged with words, and never wrested to further consequence.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XIX: OF THE LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE






CHAPTER XIX: OF THE LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE
T IS ordinarily seen how good intentions, being managed without
moderation, thrust men into most vicious effects. In this controversie,
by which France is at this instant molested with eivill wars, the best
and safest side is no doubt that which maintained both the ancient
religion and policy of the country. Nevertheless amongst the honest
men that follow it (for my meaning is not to speak of those who use
them as a colour, either to exercise their particular revenges, or to supply their greedy
avarice, or to follow the favor of Princes: but of such as do it with a true zeale towards
their religion, and an unfained holy affection, to maintaine the peace and uphold the state
of their country), of those I say diverse are seen, whome passion thrusts out of the bounds
of reason, and often forceth them to take and follow unjust, violent and rash counsels.
Certain it is, that when first our religion began to gain authority with the laws, its zeale
armed many against all sorts of Pagane bookes, whereof the learned sort have a great
loss. My opinion is that this disorder has done more hurt to learning than all the
Barbarian flames. Cornelius Tacitus is a sufficient testimony of it, for, howbeit the

Emperor Tacitus his kinsman had by express appointment stored all the libraries in the
world with it, notwithstanding one only entire copy could not escape the curious search
of those who sought to abolish it, by reason of five or sixe vain clauses contrary to our
beleefe. They have also had this easily to affoord false commendations to all the
Emperours, that made for us, and universally to condemne al the actions of those which
were our adversaries, as may plainly be seen in Julian the Emperor, surnamed the
Apostate; who in truth was a notable-rare-man, as he whose mind was lively endowed
with the discourses of Philosophy, unto which he professed to conforme all his actions;
and truely there is no kind of virtue whereof he has not left most notable examples. In
chastity (whereof the whole course of his life gives aparant testimony) a like example
unto that of Alexander and Scipio is read of him, which is, that of many wonderful fair
captive ladies brought before him, being even in the very prime of his age (for he was
slain by the Parthians about the age of one and thirty years) he would not see one of
them. Touching justice, himself would take the paines to hear all parties: and although
for curiosity sake, he would enquire of such as came before him what religion they were
of, nevertheles the enmitie he bare to ours did no whit weigh down the balance.
Himselfe made sundrie good laws, and revoked diverse subsidies and impositions, his
predecessours before him had receaved. We have two good historians as eye witnesses of
his actions. One of which (who is Marcellinus) in sundry places of his historie bitterly
reprooveth this ordinance of his, by which he forbade schooles and interdicted all
Christian rhetoricians and grammarians to teach, saying he wished this his action might be
buried under silence. It is very likely, if he had done anything else more sharpe or severe
against us, he would not have forgot it, as he that was well affected to our side. He was
indeede very severe against us, yet not a cruel enemy. For, our people themselves report
this historie of him that walking one day about the city of Calcedon, Maris, Bishop
thereof, durst call him wicked and traitor to Christ, to whom be did no other thing but
answered thus: ’Goe, wretched man, weepe and deplore the loss of thine eyes;’ to whom
the Bishop replied: ’I thank Jesus Christ that he has deprived me of my sight, that so I
might not view your impudent face;’ affecting therby (as they say) a kind of Philosophicall
patience. So it is this part cannot be referred to the cruelties which he is said to have
exercised against us. He was (says Eutropius, my other testimony) an enemy unto
Christianity, but without shedding of blood. But to return to his justice, he can be
accused of nothing but of the rigors he used in the beginning of his Empire, against such
as had followed the faction of Constantius, his predecessour. Concerning sobriety, he
never lived a soldiers kind of life, and in time of peace would feed no otherwise than
the one who prepared and enured himself to the austeritie of war. Such was his vigilancie
that he divided the night into three or foure parts, the least of which he allotted unto
sleepe; the rest he employed in visiting the state of his army and his guards, or in study,
for, amongst other his rare qualities, he was most excellent in al sorts of learning. It is
reported of Alexander the Great, that being laid down to rest, fearing lest sleep should
divert him from his thoughts and studies, he caused a bason to be set near his bed side,
and holding one of his hands out, with a brazen ball in it, that, if sleep should surprise
him, loosing his fingers ends, the ball falling into the bason, might with the noyse rouse

him from out his sleep. This man had a mind so bent to what he undertook, and by reason
of his singular abstinence so little troubled with vapours, that he might well have past this
devise. Touching military sufficiencie he was admirable in all parts belonging to a great
Captain. So was he almost al his life time in continual exercise of war, and the greater
part with us in France against the Almains and Franconians. We have no great memory
of any man that either has seen more dangers, nor that more often has made trial of his
person. His death has some affinitie with that of Epaminondas, for being strucken with
an arrow, and attempting to pull it out, he had surely done it, but that being sharpe-cutting,
it hurt and weakened his hand. In that plight he earnestly requested to be carryed forth in
the middest of his army, that so he might encourage his soldiers, who without him
courageously maintained the battle, until such time as darke night severed the armies he
was beholding to philosophie for a singular contempt, both of himself and of all humane
things. He assuredly believed the eternitie of soules. In matters of religion, he was vicious
everywhere. He was surnamed Apostata, because he had forsaken ours; notwithstanding,
this opinion seems to me more likely, that he never took it to heart, but that for t he
obedience which he bare to the law he dissembled til he had gotten the empire into his
hands. He was so superstitious in his, that even such as lived in his time, and were of his
own religion, mocked him for it; and it was said that if he had gained the victory of the
Parthians, he would have consumed the race or breede of oxen to satisfie his sacrifices. He
was also besotted with the art of soothsaying, and gave authority to all manner of
prognostikes. Amongst other things he spake at his death, he said he was much beholding
to the Gods, and greatly thanked them that they had not suffered him to be slain sodainly
or by surprise as having long before warned him both of the place and hour of his end;
nor to die of a base and easy death, more beseeming idle and effeminate persons, nor of a
lingering, languishing, and dolorous death; and that they had deemed him worthy to end
his life so nobly in the course of his victories and in the flower of his glory. There had
before appeared a vision unto him, like unto that of Marcus Brutus, which first threatened
him in Gaule, and afterward even at the point of his death presented itself to him in
Persia. The speach he is made to speak when he felt himself hurt, ’Thou hast vanquished,
O Nazarean,’ or; as some will have it, ’Content your self, O Nazarean,’ would scarce have
been forgotten, had it been believed of my testimonies, who being present in the army,
have noted even the least motions and words at his death, no more than certain other
wonders which they annex unto it. But to return to my theame, he had long before (as
says Marcellinus) hatched Paganisme in his hart, but forasmuch as he saw al those of his
army to be Christians, he durst not discover himself. In the end, when he found himself
to be sufficiently strong, and durst publish his mind, he caused the Temples of his Gods
to be opened, and by all means endeavoured to advance idolatrie. And to attaine his
purpose, having found in Constantinople the people very loose, and at ods with the
Prelates of the Christian Church, and caused them to appeare before him in his pallace, he
instantly admonished them to appease all their civill dissentions, and every one without
hindrance or fear apply themselves to follow and serve religion. Which he very carefully
solicited, hoping this licence might encrease the factions and controversies of the division,
and hinder the people from growing to any unity, and by consequence from fortifying

themselves against him by reason of their concord and in one mind-agreeing intelligence:
having by the cruelty of some Christians found that ’there is no beast in the world so much
of man to be feared as man,’ lo, here his very words, or very neare: wherewith this is
worthy consideration, that the Emperor Julian useth the same receipt of liberty of
conscience, to enkindle the trouble of civill dissention, which our Kings employ to
extinguish. It may be said on one side that, to give faction the bridle to entertaine their
opinion is to scatter contention and sow division, and as it were to lend it a hand to
augment and encrease the same: there being no barre or obstacle of laws to bridle or
hinder his course. But on the other side it might also be urged that to give factions the
bridle to uphold their opinion, is by that facilitie and ease the readie way to mollifie and
release them, and to blunt the edge which is sharpned by rareness, novelties and
difficultie. And if for the honor of our Kings devotion, I believe better it is that since they
could not do as they would, they have feigned to will what they could not.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XX: WE TASTE NOTHING PURELY

Note on th e-text: this  text was provided by Ben R. Schneider, Lawrence




CHAPTER XX: WE TASTE NOTHING PURELY
HE weaknes of our condition causeth that things in their natural
simplicitie and puritie cannot fall into our use. The elements we enjoy
are altered: metals likewise, indeed gold, must be empaired with some
other stuffe to make it fit for our service. Nor virtue so simple which
Ariston, Pyrrho, and Stoics made the end of their life, has been able
to do no good without composition: nor the Cirenaike sensualitie or
Aristipian voluptuousness. ’Of the pleasures and goods we have, there
is none exempted from some mixture of evil and incommoditie.’
----- medio de fonte leporum
Surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipsis floribus angat. Lucr. iv. 1224.
From middle spring of sweetes some bitter springs,
Which in the very flower smartly stings.
Our exceeding voluptuousness has some aire of groning and wailing. Would you not

say it dieth of anguish? Yea, when we forge its image in her excellencie, we deck it with
epithets of sickish and dolorous qualities: languor, effeminacy, weaknesse, fainting and
Morbidezza, a great testimony of their consanguinity and consubtantiality. Excessive joy
has more severity then jolity: extreme and full content more settlednes then
cheerfulnesse. Ipsa fælicitas, so nisi temperat, premit (Sest. quare, etc.) Felicitie itself,
unless it temper itself, distempers us.’ Ease consumeth us. It is that which an old Greek
verse says of such a sense: ’The Gods sell us all the goods they give us:’ that is to say they
give us not one pure and perfect, and which we buy not with the price of some evil.
Travail and pleasure, most unlike in nature, are notwithstanding followed together by a
kind of I wot not what natural conjunction. Socrates says that some God attempted to
huddle together and confound sorrow and voluptuousness: but being unable to effect it,
he bethought himself to couple them together, at least by the tail. Metrodorus said that
in sadnesse there is some aloy of pleasure. I knowe not whether he meant any thing else,
but I imagine that for one to enure himself to melancholy, there is some kind of purpose
of consent and mutual delight: I meane besides ambition, which may also be joined unto
it. There is some shadow of delicacy and quaintness which smileth and fawneth upon us
even in the lap of melancholy. Are there not some complexions that of it make their
nourishment?
------ est quædam flere voluptas.-- Ovid. Trist. iv. El. iii. 37.
It is some pleasure yet
With tears our cheekes to wet.
And one Attalus in Seneca says the remembrance of our last friends is as pleasing to us as
bitternesse in wine that is over old.
Minister veteris puer falerni
Ingere mi calices amariores: -- Cat. Lyr. Epi. xxiv. I.
Sir boy, my servitor of good old wine,
Bring me my cup thereof, bitter, but fine.
and as of sweetly-sower apples, nature discovereth this confusion unto us: painters are of
opinion that the motions and wrinkles in the face which serve to weepe serve also to
laugh. Verily before one or other be determined to express which, behold the pictures
success, you are in doubt toward which one enclineth. And the extreamity of laughing
entermingles itself with tears. Nullum sine auctoramento malum est (Sen. Epig. lxix.).
’There is no evil without some obligation.’ When I imagine man fraught with all the
commodities may be wished, let us suppose all his severall members were for ever
possessed with a pleasure like unto that of generation, even in the highest point that may
be: I find him to sinke under the burden of his ease, and perceive him altogether unable

to bear so pure, so constant, and so universall a sensuality. Truely he flies when he is
even upon the nicke, and naturally hasteneth to escape it, as from a step whereon he
cannot stay or containe himself, and feareth to sinke into it. When I religiously confesse
my self unto my self, I find the best good I have has some vicious taint. And I fear
that Plato in his purest virtue (I that am as sincere and loyall an esteemer thereof, and of
the vertues of such a stampe, as any other can possibly be) if he had neerely listened unto
it (and sure he listened very near) he would therein have heard some harsh tune of
humane mixture, but an obscure tune, and only sensible unto himself. Man all in all is
but a botching and party coloured work. The very laws of Justice can not subsist
without some commixture of injustice. And Plato says they undertake to cut off Hidræs
heads that pretend to remove all incommodities and inconveniences from the laws. Omne
magnum exemplum habet aliquid ex iniquo, quod contra singulos utilitate publica
rependitur: (Tacitus, Ann. xiv. Cassi.) ’Every great example has some touch of injustice
which is requited by the common good against particulars,’ says Tacitus. It is likewise
true that for the use of life and service of public society there may be excess in the
purity and perspicuity of our spirits. This piercing brightnes has overmuch subtility and
curiosity. They should be made heavy and dull io make them the more obedi ent to
example and practice, and they must be thickned and obscured to proportion them to this
shady and terrestriall life. Therefore are vulgar and less wire drawne wits found to be
more fit and happy in the conduct of affairs. And the exquisite and high- raised opinions
of Philosophy unapt and unfit to exercise. This sharpe vivacity of the spirit, and this
supple and restlesse volubility troubleth our negotiations. Humane enterprises should be
managed more grosely and superficially, and have a good and great part of them left for
the rights of fortune. Affaires need not be sifted so nicely and so profoundly. A man
looseth himself about the considerations of so many contrary lustres and diverse formes.
Volutantibus res inter se pugnantes, obtorpuerant animi: (Liv. dec. iv. lib. 2). ’Their
mindes were astonished while they revolved things so different.’ It is that which our elders
report of Simonides; because his imagination concerning the question Hieron the King had
made unto him (which the better to answer he had diverse dayes allowed him to think of
it) presented sundry subtil and sharpe considerations unto him; doubting which might be
the likeliest; he altogether dispaireth of the truth. Whosoever searcheth all the
circumstances and embraceth all the consequences thereof hindereth his election. A meane
engine does equally conduct and sufficeth for the executions of great and little weights. It
is commonly seen that the best husbands and the thriftiest are those who cannot tell how
they are so: and that these cunning arithmeticians do seldom thrive by it. I know a
notable pratler and an excellent blasoner of all sorts of husbandry and thrift who has most
pitteously let ten thousand pound sterling a yeare pass from him. I know another who
says he consulteth better than any man of his counsell, and there cannot be a properer man
to see unto or of more sufficiencie; notwithstanding, when he commeth to any execution,
his own servants find he is far otherwise: this I say without mentioning or accounting
his ill lucke.




Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XXI: AGAINST IDLENESSE, OR DOING NOTHING






CHAPTER XXI: AGAINST IDLENESSE, OR DOING NOTHING
HE Emperor Vespasian, lying sicke of the disease whereof he died,
omitted not to endeavour to understand the state of the empire; and
lying in his bed, uncessantly dispatched many affairs of great
consequence; and his physicians chiding him, as of a thing hurtful of
his health, he answered that an Emperor should die standing upright.
See here a notable saying, fitting my humor, and worthy a great
prince. Adrian the Emperor used the same afterward to like purpose.
And Kings ought often to be put in mind of it, to make them feel that this great charge
which is given them of the commandement over so many men is no idle charge: and that
there is nothing may so justly distaste a subject from putting himself in pain and danger
for the service of his Prince then therewhilst to see him given to lazinesse, to base and
vain occupations, and to have care of his conservation, seeing him so carelesse of ours. If
any shall go about to maintaine that it is better for a Prince to manage his wars by others
then by himself. Fortune will store him with sufficient examples of those whose
lieutenants have achieved great enterprises, and also of some whose presence would have

been more hurtful then profitable. But no vertuous and coragious Prince will endure to be
entertained with so shame-full instructions. Under colour of preserving his head (as the
statue of a Saint) for the good fortune of his estate, they degrade him of his office, which
is altogether in military actions, and declare him uncapable of it. I know one would rather
choose to be beaten then sleepe whilst others fight for him; and who without jealousie
never saw his men performe any notable act in his absence. And Selim the first had reason
to say that he thought victories gotten in the masters absence not to be complete. So much
more willingly would he have said that such a master ought to blush for shame, who only
by his name should pretend any share in it, having thereunto employed nothing but his
thought and verbal direction. Nor that since in such a busines the advices and
commandements which bring honor are only those given in the field and even in the
action. No Pilot exerciseth his office standing still. The Princes of Otomans race (the
chiefest race in the world in warlike fortune) have earnestly embraced this opinion. And
Baiazeth the second, with his son, who, ammusing themselves about sciences and other
private home matters, neglected the same, gave diverse prejudiciall blowes unto their
Empire. And Amurath the third of that name, who now raigneth, following their example,
beginneth very well to feel their fortunes. Was it not the King of England, Edward the
third, who spake these words of our King Charles the fifth: ’There was never King that
less armed himself; and yet Was never King that gave me so much so do, and put me to
so many plunges.’ He had reason to think it strange, as an effect of fortune, rather than of
reason. And let such as will number the Kings of Castile and Portugall amongst the
warlike and magnanimous conquerors, seek for some other adherent then my self,
forasmuch as twelve hundred leagues from their idle residence they have made
themselves masters of both Indias, only by the conduct and direction of their factors, of
whom it would be known whether they durst but go and enjoy them il person. The
Emperor Julian said moreover that a Philosopher and gallant minded man ought not so
much as breathe; that is to say, not to give corporall necessities, but what may not be
refused them; ever holding both mind and body busied about notable, great and vertuous
matters. He was ashamed any man should see him spitte or sweate before peo ple (which
is also said of the Lacedemonian youths, and Xenophon reporteth it of the Persian)
forasmuch as he thought that continuall travell, exercise, and sobriety should have
concocted and dried up all such superfluities. What Seneca says shall not impertinently be
alleadged here; that the ancient Romans kept their youth upright, and taught their children
nothing that was to be learned sitting. It is a generous desire to endevor to die both
profitable and manlike: but the effect consisteth no t so much in our good resolution, as in
our good fortune. A thousand have resolved to vanquish or to die fighting, which have
missed both the one and other: Hurts or imprisonment crossing their design and
yielding them a forced kind of life. There are diseases which vanquish our desires and
knowledge. Fortune should not have seconded the vanity of the Roman Legions, who by
oath bound themselves either to die or conquer. Victor, Marce Fabi, revertur ex acie: Si
fallo, Iovem patrem Gradinum que Martem aliosque iratos invoco Deos: (dec. i. lib. 2). ’I
will, O Marcus Fabius, return conqueror from the army. If in this I deceive you, I wish
both great Jupiter and Mars, and t he other Gods offended with me.’ The Portugalles

report that in certain places of their Indian conquests they found some soldiers who with
horrible execrations had damned themselves never to enter into any composition, but
either they would be killed or remaine victorious; and in signe of their vowe wore their
heads and beards shaven. We may hazard and obstinate ourselves long enough. It
seems that blowes shunne them who over-joyfully present themselves unto them; and
unwillingly reach those that overwillingly go to meet them and corrupt their end. Some
unable to lose his life by his adversaries force, having assaid all possible means, has
been enforced to accomplish his resolution, either to bear away the honor, or not to
carry away his life, and even in the fury of the fight to put himself to death. There are
sundrie examples of it, but note this one. Philistus, chief General of yong Dionysius his
navie against the Siracusans, presented them the battle, which was very sharply withstood,
their forces being likewise; wherein by reason of his prowess he had the better in the
beginning. But the Siracusans flocking thicke and threefold about his gally to grapple and
board him, having performed many worthy exployts with his own person to ridde
himself from them, dispairing of all escape, with his own hand deprived himself of that
life which so lavishly and in vain he had abandoned to his enemies hands. Moly Moluch,
King of Fez, who not long since obtained that famous victory against Sebastian, King of
Portugall, a notable victory by reason of the death of three Kings, and transmission of so
great a Kingdome to the crowne of Castile, chanced to be grievously sicke at what time
the Portugales with armed hand entered his dominions, and afterwards, though he foresaw
it approaching nearer unto death, empaired worse and worse. Never did man more stoutly
or more vigorously make use of an undanted courage than he. He found himself very
weake to endure the ceremonious pompe which the Kings of that country, at their entrance
into the camp are presented withall, which according to their fashion is full of all
magnificence and state, and charged with all manner of action; and therefore he resigned
that honor to his brother, yet resigned he nothing but the office of the chief Captain.
Himselfe most gloriously executed and most exactly perfourmed all other necessary duties
and profitable offices: holding his body laid along his cowch, but his mind upright and
courage constant, even to his last gasp and in some sort after. He might have undermined
his enemies, who were foolhardily advanced in his dominions, and was exceedingly
grieved that for want of a little longer life and a substitute to manage the war and
affairs of so troubled a State, he was enforced to seek a bloody and hazardous battle,
having another pure and undoubted victory in hand. He notwithstanding managed the
continuance of his sicknesse so miraculously that he consumed his enemy, diverted him
from his sea-fleete and maritime places he held along the coast of Affricke, even until the
last day of his life, which by designe he reserved and employed for so great and renowned
a fight. He ranged his battle in a round, on every side besieging the Portugals army, which
bending round and coming close, did not only hinder them in the conflict of (which
through the valor of that yong assailant King was very furious), since they were were to
turn their faces on all sides, but also hindred them from running away after the rowte.
And finding all issues seized, and all passages closed, they were constrained to turn upon
themselves: Coacervantur que non solum cede, sed etiam fuga: ’They fall on heapes not
only by slaughter but by flight:’ And so pel mell to heape on one anothers necke, preparing

a most murtherous and compleate victory for the conquerors. When he was even dying he
caused himself to be carryed and hauled where-ever neede called for him; and passing
along the files he exhorted the captaines and animated the soldiers one after another. And
seeing one wing of the light to have the worst, and in some danger, no man could hold
him, but he would needs, with his naked sword in hand, get on hors-backe striving by all
possible means to enter the throng, his men holding him some by the bridle, some by the
gowne, and some by the stirrops. This toyle and straining of himself made an end of that
Iittle remainder of his life; then was he laid on his bed: but coming to himself again,
starting up as out of a swown, each other faculty failing him, he gave them warning to
conceal his death (which was the necessariest commandement he could give his servants,
lest the soldiers, hearing of his death, might fall into despaire) and so yielded the Ghost,
holding his fore-fingers upon his mouth, an ordinary signall to impose silence. What man
ever lived so long and so near death? Who ever died so upright and undaunted? The
extreamest degree, and most natural, courageously to manage death, is to see or front the
same, not only without amazement, but without care; the course of life continuing free
even in death. As Cato, who amused himself to studie and sleepe, having a violent and
bloudy death present in his heart, and as it were holding it in his hand.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XXII: OF RUNNING POSTS, OR COURIERS.






CHAPTER XXII: OF RUNNING POSTS, OR COURIERS.
HAVE been none of the weakest in this exercise, which is proper unto
men of my stature, well-trussed, short and tough, but now I have given
it over: it toyles us over-much to hold out long. I was even now reading
how King Cyrus, that he might more speedily receave news from al
parts of his Empire (which was of exceeding great length), would needs
have it tried how far a horse could in a day go outright without baiting,
at which distance he caused stations to be set up, and men to have fresh horses ready for al
such as came to him. And some report this swift kind of running answereth the flight of
cranes. Cæsar says that Lucius Vibullis Rufus, making hast to bring Pompey an
advertisement, rode day and night, and to make more speed shifted many horses. And
himself (as Suetonius writeth) would up on an hyred coache run a hundred miles a day.
And sure he was a rancke-runner: for where any river hindred his way he swam it over,
and never went out of his way to seek for a bridge or foard. Tiberius Nero going to visite
his brother Drusus who lay sick in Germany, having three coaches in his company, ranne
two hundred miles in foure and twenty hours. In the Roman wars against King

Antiochus, Titus Sempronius Gracchus (says Titus Livius) per dispositos equos prope
incredibili celeritate ab Anmphisa tertio die Pellam pervenit: ’By horse laid poste, with
incredible speede within three dayes he past from Amphisa to Pella.’ And viewing the
place, it seems they were set stations for postes, and not newly appointed for that race.
The invention of Cecina in sending news to those of his house had much more speede; he
carried certain swallowes with him, and having occasion to send news home, he let
them flie toward their nests, first marking them with some colour proper to signifie what
he meant, as before he had agreed upon with his friends. In the theaters of Rome the
household masters carried pigeons in their bosomes, under whose wings they fastened
letters, when they would send any word home, which were also taught to bring back an
answer. D. Brutus used some, being besieged in Mutina, and others elsewhere. In Peru
they went poste upon mens backes, who took theire masters upon their shoulders, sitting
upon certain bears or chaires with such agilitie that, in full running speede, the first
porters, without any stay, cast their load upon other who upon the way waited for them,
and so they to others. I understand that the Valachians, which are messengers unto the
great Turk, use extreme diligence in their businesses forasmuch as they have authority to
dismount the first passengers they meet upon the high-way, and give him their tyred
horse. And because they shal not be weary, they are won t to swaithe themselves hard
about the body with a broad swathe or seare-cloth, as diverse others do with us: I cold
never find ease or good by it.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XXIII: OF BAD MEANES EMPLOIED TO A GOOD END






CHAPTER XXIII: OF BAD MEANES EMPLOIED TO A GOOD END
HERE is a wonderful relation and correspondencie found in this
universall policy of Natures workes, which manifestly sheweth it is
neither casual nor directed by diverse masters. The infirmities and
conditions of our bodies are likewise seen in states and governments:
Kingdomes and Commonwealths as well as we, are borne, florish, and
fade through age. We are subject unto a repleatnesse of humors,
hurtful and unprofitable, indeed be it of good humors (for even
physicians fear that, and because there is nothing constant in us; they say, that perfection
of health, over joyful and strong, must by art be abated and diminished, lest our nature,
unable to settle itself in any certain place, and for her amendment to ascend higher,
should over-violently recoile backe into disorder; and therefore they prescribe unto
wrestlers purging and phlebotomies to subtract that superabundance of health from them
or of bad, [sic] which is the ordinary cause of sicknesse. Of such like repletion are states
often seen to be sicke, and diverse purgations are wont to be used to purge them. As we
have seen some to dismisse a great number of families (chiefly to disburthen the country)

which elsewhere go to seek where they may at others charge seat themselves. In this
sorte our ancient French, leaving the high countries of Germany, came to possesse Gaule,
whence they displaced the first inhabitants. Thence grew that infinite confluence of people
which afterward, under Brenus and others, overranne Italie. Thus the Gothes and
Vandalls, as also the nations which possesse Greece, left their natural countries to go
where they might have more elbow-roome: and hardly shall we see two or three corners in
the world that have not felt the effect of such a remooving alteration. The Romanes, by
such means, erected their Colonies; for, perceiving their citie to growe over-populous,
they were wont to discharge it of unnecessary people, which they sent to inbabite and
manure the countries they had subdued. They have also sometimes maintained war with
some of their enemies, not only thereby to keep their men in breath, lest idleness, the
mother of corruption, should cause them some inconvenience.
Et patimur longæ pacis mala, sævior armis
Luxuria incumbit. --Juven, Sat. vi. 292.
We suffer of long peace the soking harmes,
On us lies luxury more fierce then arms.
But also to let the Common-wealth blood and somewhat to allay the over vehement heat
of their youth, to lop the sprigs and thin the branches of this over-spreading tree, too much
abounding in ranknesse and gaillardise. To this purpose they maintained a good while war
with the Carthaginians. In the treaty of Bretigny, Edward the 3. King of England, would
by no means comprehend in that general peace the controversie of the Dutchie of
Britany, to the end he might have some way to disburthen himself of his men of war, and
that the multitude of English-men, which he had emploied about the wars of France
should not return into England. It was one of the reasons induced Philip our king to
consent that his son John should be sent to war beyond the seas, that so he might
carry with him a great number of yong hot-blouds which were amongst his trained
military men. There are diverse now adaies, which will speak thus, wishing this violent
and burning emotion we see and feel amongst us might be derived to some neighbor
war, fearing lest those offending humors, which at this instant are predominant in our
body, if they be not diverted elsewhere, will still maintaine our fever in force, and in the
end cause our utter destruction: And in truth a forraine war is nothing so dangerous a
disease as a civill: But I will not believe that God would favor so unjust an enterprise, to
offend and quarrell with others for our commodity.
Nil mihi tam valde placeat Rhamnusia virgo,
Quod temere invitis suscipiatur heris. -- Cat. Epig. Eleg. iv. 77.
That fortune likes me not which is constrained
By Lords unwilling rashly entertained.

Notwithstanding the weaknesse of our condition, does often urge us to this necessity, to
use bad means to a good end. Lycurgus the most vertuous and perfect law-giver that ever
was, devised this most unjust fashion, to instruct his people unto temperance, by force to
make the helots, which were their servants, to be drunken that seeing them so lost and
buried in wine, the Spartanes might abhor the excess of that vice. Those were also more
to be blamed, who anciently allowed that criminall offenders what death soever they were
condemned unto, should by physicians all alive be torn in pieces, that so they might
naturally see our inward parts, and thereby establish a more assured certainty in their art:
for if a man must needs erre or debauch himself, it is more excusable if he do it for his
soules health then for his bodies good. As the Romans trained up and instructed their
people to valor, and contempt of dangers and death, by the outragious spectacles of
gladiators and deadly fighting fencers, who in presence of them all combated, mangled,
sliced, and killed one another.
Quid vesani aliud sibi vult a rs impia ludi,
Quid mortes iuvenum, quid sanguine pasta voluptas?
What else means that mad art of impious sense,
Those yong-mens deaths, that blood-fed pleasing sense?
which custom continued even until the time of Theodosius the Emperor.
Arripe delatam tua dux in tempora famam,
Quodque patris superest successor laudis habeto:
Nullus in vrbe cadat, cujus sit poena voluptas,
Jam solis contenta feris infamis arena,
Nulla cruentatis homicidia ludat in armis. Prud. cont. Sym. ii. f.
The fame defer’d to your times entertaine,
Enherite praise which does from Sire remaine
Let none die to give pleasure by his pain:
Be shamefull Theaters with beasts content
Not in goar’d arms manslaughter represent.
Surely it was a wonderful example, and of exceeding benefit for the peoples institution,
to see dayly one or two hundred, indeed sometimes a thousand brace of men, armed one
against another, in their presence to cut and hacke one another in pieces with so great
constancy of courage, that they were never seen to utter one word of faintness or
commiseration, never to turn their backe, nor so much as to show a motion of
demissenesse, to avoide their adversaries blowes: but rather to extend their necks to their
swords, and present themselves unto their strokes. It has hapned to diverse of them, who
through many hurts being wounded to death, have sent to ask the people whether they

were satisfied with their duty, before they would lie down in the place. They must not
only fight and die constantly, but jocondly: in such sort as they were cursed and bitterly
scolded at, if in receiving their death they were any way seen to strive, indeed madnesse
encited them to it.
-----consurgit ad ictus,
Et quoties victor ferrum iugulo inserit, illa
Delicias ait esse suas, pectusque jacentis
Virgo modesta ubet converso pollice rumpi. -- Prud. cont Sym. ii.
The modest maide, when wounds are given, upriseth;
When victors sword the vanquisht throate surprises,
She says, it is her sport, and does command
T’embrue the conquer’d breast, by signs of hand.
The first Romans disposed thus of their criminals: but afterward they did so with their
innocent servants; indeed, of their free men, which were sold to that purpose: indeed of Senators,
and Roman Knights and women also.
Nunc caput in mortem vendant, et funus arenæ,
Atque hostem sibi quisqe parat cum bella quiescunt.
They sell mens lives to death and stages sight,
When wars do cease, they find with whom to fight.
Hos inter fremitus novosque lusus,
Stat sexus rudis insciusque ferri.
Et pugnas capit improbus viriles:
Amidst these tumults, these strange sporting sights,
That sex does sit which knowes not how sword bites,
And entertaines unmov’d those manly fights.
Which I should deem very strange and incredible; if we were not dayly accustomed to
see in our wars many thousands of foreigne nations, for a very small sum of mony, to
engage both their blood and life in quarrels wherein they are nothing interessed.




Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXIV: OF THE ROMAN GREATNESS.






CHAPTER XXIV: OF THE ROMAN GREATNESS.
WILL but speak a word of this infinite argument, and slightly glance
at it, to show the simplicitie of those who compare the seely greatness
of these times unto that. In the seaventh book of Ciceroes familiar
Epistles (and let Gramarians remove this title of familiar if they please,
for, to say truth, it makes but little to the purpose: and they who in lieu
of familiar have placed ad familiares, may wrest some argument for
themselves, from that which Suetonius says in Cæsars Life, that there was a volume of his
Epistles ad familares) there is one directed unto Cæsar then being in Gaule, in which
Cæsar repeats these very words which were in the end a former letter that Cæsar had
written to him: ’Touching Marcus Furius, whom you bast commended unto me, I will
make him King of Gaule, and if you wilt have me prefer any other of your friends, send
them to me.’ It was not new in a simple Roman Citizen (as Cæsar then was) to dispose of
kingdomes, for as well deprived he King Deiotarus of his, to give it to a gentleman of the
city of Pergamo, called Mithridates. And those who wrote his Life mention many
kingdomes sold by him. And Suetonius reporteth that he at one time wrested three

millions and five hundred thousand crownes of gold from King Ptolomæus, which
amounted very near unto the price of his kingdome.
Tot Galatæ, tot Pontus est, tot Lydia numnis -- CLAUD. in Eutrop. 1. i. 20,
3
Forasmuch let Galatia go,
Forasmuch Lidia, Pontus so.
Marcus Antonius said, ’The greatness of the Roman people was not so much discerned
by what it took as by what it gave.’ Yet some ages before Antonius was there one
amongst others of so wonderful authority, as through all his history I know no marke
carrieth the name of his credit higher. Antiochus possessed all Egypt, and was very near
to conquer Cyprus and others depending of that Empire. Vpon the progresse of his
victories, C. Popilius came unto him in the behalfe of the Senate, and at first arrivall
refused to take him by the hand before he had read the letters he brought him. The King
having read them, said he would deliberate of them. Popilius with a wand encireled the
place about where he stood, and thus bespake him: ’Give me an answer to carry back to
the Senate before you goest out of this circle.’ Antiochus, amazed at the rudenesse of so
urging a commandement, after he had paused a while, replyed thus: ’I will do what the
Senat commandeth me.’ Then Popilius saluted him as a friend unto the Roman people. ’To
have renounced so great a Monarchy and forgon the course of so successfull prosperity by
the only impression of three written lines! He had good reason, as afterward he did, by his
Ambassadors to send the Senate word that he had received their ordinances with the same
respect as if they had come from the immortall Gods. All the kingdomes Augustus
subdued by right of war, he restored to those who had lost them, or presented strangers
with them. And concerning this purpose, Tacitus, speaking of Cogidunus, King of
England, by a wonderful trait makes us perceive this infinit greatnes and might. The
Romans (says he) were from all antiquity accustomed to leave those kings whom they had
vanquished in the possession of their kingdomes under their authority: Vt haberent
instrumenta servitutis et reges: (CORN. TACIT. Vit. Jul. Agric.) ’That they might have
even Kings also f or instruments of their bondage.’ It is very likely that Soliman, the great
Turke, whom we have seen to use such a liberality and give away the Kingdome of
Hungary and other dominions, did more respect this consideration then that he was wont
to alleage; which is, that he was over wearied with the many monarchies and surcharged
with the severall dominions, which either his own or his ancestors virtue had gotten him.
Previous Essay.
Next Essay.




Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXV: HOW A MAN SHOULD NOT COUNTERFEIT TO BE SICKE.






CHAPTER XXV: HOW A MAN SHOULD NOT COUNTERFEIT TO BE SICKE.
HERE is an epigram in Martiall that may pass for a good one (for there
are of all sorts in him), wherein he pleasantly relateth the story of
Cælius, who to avoide the courting of certain great men in Rome, to
give attendance at their rising, and to waite, assist and follow them,
feigned to be troubled with the goute; and to make his excuse more
likely, he caused his legs to be ointed and swathed and lively
counterfeted the behaviour and countenance of a goutie man. In the end
fortune did him the favor to make him goutie indeede.
Tantum cura potest et ars doloris,
Desiit fingere Cælius podagram. -- MART. 1. vii. Epig. xxxviii. 8.
So much the care and cunning can of pain:
Cælius (grown gowty) leaves the gowt to faine.

As far as I remember I have read a like history in some place of Appian, of one who,
purposing to escape the proscriptions of the Triumvirat of Rome, and to conceal himself
from the knowledge of those who pursued him, kept himself close and disguised, adding
this other invention to it, which was to counterfeit blindnes in one eye, who when he came
somewhat to recover his liberty, and would have left off the plaster he had long time
worne over his eyes, he found that under that mask he had altogether lost the sight of it. It
may be the action of his sight was weakned, having so long continued without exercise
and the usual virtue was wholly converted into the other eye. For we may plainly perceive
that holding one eye shut, it convaieth some part of its effect into his fellow; in such sort
as it will swell and grow bigger. As also the idlenes, together with the warmth of the
medicaments and swathing, might very well draw some goutie humor into the legge of
Martials goutie fellow. Reading in Froisart the vow which a gallant troupe of younge
English-men had made to weare their eyes hudwinkt until such time as they should pass
into France, and there performe some notable exploite of arms upon us: I have often
laughed with my self to think what they would have imagined if as to the fore aleaged it
had hapned to them, and had all been blind of the left eye at what time they turned to
look upon their mistresses, for whose sake they had made their vowe and undertaken such
an enterprise. Mothers have great reason to chide their children when they counterfeit to
be blind with one eye, crompt backe, squint-eyed, or lame, and such other deformities of
the body; for besides that the body thus tender may easily receive some ill custom, I
know not how, it seems that fortune is glad to take us at our word: and I have heard
diverse examples of some who have fallen sicke in very deede because they had purposed
to faine sick. I have at all times enured my self, whether I be on horsebacke or afoote, to
carry a good heavy wand or cudgell in my hand; Yea, I have endeavoured to do it
handsomely, and with an effected kind of countenance to continue so. Many have
threatned me that fortune will one time or other turn this my wantonnes into necessitie. I
presume upon this that I should be the first of my race that ever was troubled with the
gowt. But lett us somewhat amplifie this chapter, and patch it up with another piece
concerning blindnes. Plinie reports of one who, dreaming in his sleepe that he was blind,
awaking the next morning, was found to be stark blinde, having never had any precedent
sickenes. The power of imagination may very well further such things as elsewhere I have
showed; and Plinie seems to be of this opinion; but it is more likely that the motions
which the body felt inwardly (whereof Physitians may, if they please, find out the cause),
and which took away his sight, were the occasion of his dreame. Let us also add another
story concerning this purpose, which Seneca reporteth in his Epistles. Thou knowest
(says he, writing unto Lucilius) that Harpaste, my wifes foole, is left upon me as an
hereditarie charge; for by my own nature I am an enemy unto such monsters, and if I
have a desire to laugh at a foole, I neede not seek one far; I laugh at my self. This
foolish woman has sodainly lost her sight. I report a strange thing, but yet very true. She
will not believe she is blind, and urgeth her keeper uncessantly to lead her, saying still,
my house is very darke. What we laugh at in her, I entreat you to believe that the same
happens to each of us. No man knows himself to be covetous or niggardly. Even the
blinde require a guide, but we stray from ourselves. I am not ambitious, say we, but no

man can live otherwise at Rome: I am not sumptuous, but the citie requireth great charges.
It is not my fault if I be collerike; if I have not yet set down a sure course of my life, the
fault is in youth. Let us not seek our evil out of us; it is within us, it is rooted in our
entrailes. And only because we perceive not that we are sicke, makes our recoverie to
prove more difficult. If we beginne not betimes to cure ourselves, when shall we provide
for so many sores, for so many evils? Yet have we a most sweet and gentle medicine of
Philosophy; for of others no man feeles the leisure of them but after his recoveries
whereas she pleaseth, easeth, and cureth all at once. See here what Seneca says, who has
some what diverted me from my purpose: but there is profit in the exchange.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXVI: OF THUMBS.






CHAPTER XXVI: OF THUMBS.
ACITUS reporteth that amongst certain barbarous kings, for the
confirmation of an inviolable bonde or covenant, their manner was to
join their right hands close and hard together with enterlacing their
thumbs: and when by hard wringing them the blood appeared at their
ends, they pricked them with some sharp point, and then mutually
entersuckt each one the others. Phisicians say thumbes are the master
fingers of the hand, and that their Latine etymologie is derived of
Pollere. The Græcians call it αντιχειρ, as a man would say, another hand. And it seems
the Latines likewise, take them sometimes in this sense, id est, for the whole hand:
Sed nec vocibus excitata blandis,
Molli pollice nec rogata surgit.-- MART. 1. xii. Epig. xcix. 8.
It wil not rise, though with sweet words excited,

Nor with the touch of softest thumb invited.
In Rome it was heretofore a signe of favor to wring and kisse the thumbs:
Fautor utroque tuum laudabit pollice ludum -- HOR. 1. i. Epist. xviii. 66.
He that applaudes will praise,
With both his thumbs, your plaies:
and of disfavor or disgrace to lift them up and turn them outward.
converso pollice vulgi Quemlibet occidunt populariter. -- JUVEN. Sat.
iii. 36
When people turn their thumbs away,
They popularly any slay.
Such as were hurt or maymed in their thumbs were by the Romanes dispensed from
going to war, as they who had lost their weapons hold-fast. Augustus did confiscate all
the goods of a Roman knight, who through malice had cut off the thumbes of two young
children of his, thereby to excuse them from going to war and before him the Senate in
the time of the Italian wars had condemned Caius Vatienus to perpetuall prison, and
confiscated all his goods, forasmuch as he had willingly cut off the thumb of his left hand,
so to exempt himself from the voyage. Some one, whose name I remember not, having
gained a great victory by sea, caused all the enemies whom he had vanquished and taken
prisoners to have their thumbs cut off, thinking thereby to deprive them of all means of
fighting, or rowing, or handling their oares. The Athenians likewise caused them to be cut
off from them of Ægina, to take from them the preeminence in the art of navigation. In
Lacedæmon masters punished their schollers by byting their thumbs.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXVII: COWARDIZE, THE MOTHER OF CRUELTY






CHAPTER XXVII: COWARDIZE, THE MOTHER OF CRUELTY
HAVE often heard it reported that Cowardize is the mother of Cruelty:
And have perceived by experience that this malicious sharpnes and
inhumane severitie of corage is commonly accompanied with feminine
remissenesse. I have seen some of the cruelest subject to weepe easily,
and for frivolous causes. Alexander the tyrant of Pheres could not
endure to see tragedies acted in the theatres for fear his subjects
should see him sob and weepe at the misfortunes of Hecuba and Andromache; he who
without remorse or pity caused daily so many poore people to be most cruelly massacred
and barbarously murthered. May it be weaknesse of spirit makes them so pliable to all
extremities? valor (whose effect is only to exercise itself against resistance,
Nec nisi bellantis gaudet cervice iuvenci. -- Claud. Epist. ad Hadr. v. 30.
Nor takes he joy to domineere
But on the necke of sturdie steere)

refraines itself in seeing her enemy prostrate to her mercy: but pusillanimitie, to say that
she also is of the feaste, since it cannot be joined to the first part takes for her share the
second, which is massacre and blood. Murthers after victories are commonly effected by
the baser kind of people and officers that waite upon the baggage and cariage. And the
reason we see so many unheard-of cruelies in popular wars is that this vulgar rascalitie
does martially flesh and enure itself to dive in blood up to the elbowes, and mangle a
body, or hacke a carcase lying and groveling at their feete, having no manner of feeling of
other valor.
Et Lupus et turpes instant morientibus Ursi.
Et quæcumque minor nobilitate fera est. -- Ovid. Trist. iii. El. v. 35.
A Wolfe or filthie Beare the dying man oppresse.
Or some such beast as in nobilitle is less.
As the Craven Curres, which at home or in their Kennels will tugge and bite the skins of
those wild beastes which in the fields they durst not so much as bark at. What is it that
now adaies makes all our quarrels mortal? And whereas our forefathers had some degree
of revenge, we now beginne by the last; and at first brunt nothing is spoken of but killing?
What is it, if it be not cowardice? Every man seeth it is more bravery and disdaine for one
to beat his enemy than make an end of him, and to keep him at a bay, then make him die.
Moreover, that the desire of revenge is thereby allayed and better contented; for it aymeth
at nothing so much as to give or show a motion or feeling of revenge only of herself.
And thats the reason we do not challenge a beast, or fall upon a stone when it hurts us,
because they are incapable to feel our revenge. And to kill a man is to shelter him from
our offence. And even as Bias exclaimed upon a wicked man: ’I know that soone or late
you shall be punished for your lewdness but I fear me I shall not see it;’ and moaned the
Orchomenians, because the penance which Liciscus had for his treason committed against
them, came at such a time as none of them were living whom it had concerned, and whom
the pleasure of that punishment might most delight so ought revenge to be moaned when
he on whom it is inflicted looseth the means to endure or feel it; For, even as the
revenger will see the action of the revenge, that so he may feel the pleasure of it, so must
he on whom he is revenged, both see and feel that he may hereby receive both repentance
and grief. He shall rew it, say we. And though he receive a stab, or a blow with a pistol
on his head, shal we think he wil repent? Contrariwise, if we marke him well, we shal
perceive that in falling, he makes a moe or bob at us. He is far from repenting when he
rather seems to be beholding us: inasmuch as we affoord him the favourablest office of
life, which is to make him dye speedily and as it were insensibly. We are left to shift up
and down, run and trot, and squat here and there, and al to avoyd the officers or
escape the magistrates that pursue us; and he is at rest. ’To kill a man is good to escape a
future offence, and not revenge the wrongs past.’ It is rather an action of fear than of

bravery; of precaution than of an enterprise. It is apparent that by it we quit both the true
end of revenge and the respect of our reputation: if he live we fear he will or may charge
us with the like. It is not against him, it is for you, you riddest your self of him. In the
kingdome of Narsinga this expedient would be bootlesse. There not only soldiers, and
such as professe arms, but every meane artificer, decide their quarels with the swords
point. The King never refuseth any man the combate that is disposed to fight, and if they
be men of quality he wil be by in person, and reward the victor with a chaine of gold:
which, whosoever has a mind unto, and wil obtaine it, may freely challenge him that
weareth the same, and enter combate with him. And having overcome one combate, has
many following the same. If we thought by virtue to be ever superiors unto our enemy,
and at our pleasure gourmandize him, it would much grieve us he should escape us, as he
does in dying. We rather endeavour to vanquish surely then honourably. And in our
quarrels we rather seek for the end then for the glory. Asinius Pollio for an honest man
less excusable, committed a like fault; who, having written many invectives against
Plancus, stayed until he were dead to publish them. It was rather to flurt at a blind man,
and rail in a dead mans eare, and to offend a senselesse man, than incur the danger of
his revenge. And men answered in this behalfe, that it only belonged to Hobgoblins to
wrestle with the dead. He who stayeth till the author be dead whose writings he will
combate, what says he but that he is weake and quarrellous? It was told Aristotle, that
somebody had spoken ill of him, to whom he answered, ’Let him also whippe me, so my
self be not by.’ Our forefathers were content to revenge an insult with the lie, a lie with a
blowe, a blowe with blood, and so in order. They were sufficiently valiant not to fear
their adversary, though he lived and were wronged: whereas we quake for fear so long as
we see him afoot. And that it is so, does not our modern practise pursue to death as well
him who has wronged us as him whom we have offended? It is also a kind of
dastardlinesse which has brought this fashion into our single combates, to accompany us
in the fields with seconds, thirdes, and fourths. They were anciently single combates, but
now they are skirmishes and battles. To be alone, feared the first that invented it. Quum in
se cuique minimum fiducite esset: ’When every man had least confidence in himself.’ For,
what company soever it be, it does naturally bring some comfort and ease in danger. In
ancient time they were wont to employ third persons as sticklers, to see no treachery or
disorder were used, and to bear witnes of the combates success. But now this fashion is
come up, let any man be engaged, whosoever is envited cannot well containe himself to
be a spectator, lest it be imputed unto him it is either for want of affection or lack of
courage. Besides the injustice of such an action and villany, for your honors protection,
to engage other valor and force than your own, I find it a disadvantage in an honest and
worthy man, and who wholly trusts unto himself, to entermingle his fortune with a
second man: every one runneth sufficient hazard for himself, and need not also run it
for another: and has enough to do to assure himself of his own virtue for the defense of
his life, without committing so precious a thing into third mens hands. For, if the contrary
has not expresly been covenanted of all foure, it is a combined party. If your fellow
chance to faile, you have two upon you, and not without reason: and to say it is a
Superchiery, as it is indeed: as being well armed, to charge a man who has but a piece of a

sword, or being sound and strong, to set upon a man sore hurt. But if they be advantages
you have gotten fighting, you may use them without imputation. Disparitie is not
considered, and inequality is not balanced, but by the state wherein the fight is begun. As
of the rest you must rely on fortune, and if alone or single you chance to have three upon
you, your other two companions being slain, you have no more wrong done you than I
should offer in wars in striking an enemy whom at such an advantage I should find
grappled with one of my fellow-soldiers. The nature of societie beareth where troupe is
against troupe (as where our Duke of Orleans chalenged Henry King of England, one
hundred against another hundred; three hundred against as many, as did the Argians
against the Lacedemonians; three to three, as were the Horatij against the Curatij), the
pluralitie of either side is never respected for more than a single man. Wheresoever there
is company, the hazard is confused and disordered. I have a private interest in this
discourse. For my brother, the Lord of Matecoulom, being desired in Rome to second and
accompany a gentleman with whom he had no great acquaintance, who was defendant and
challenged by another; the fight begunne, my brother by chance found himself
confronted with one nearer and better known to him (I would faine be resolved of these
laws of honor, which so often shock and trouble those of reason), whom after he had
vanquished and dispatched, seeing the two principals of the quarrell yet standing and
unhurt, he went to reskew his fellow. What could he do less? should he have stood still,
and (if chance would so have had it) see him defeated for whose defense he was entered the
quarrell? What until then he had done was nothing to the purpose, and the quarrel was still
undecided. Al the courtesy you can, you ought surely use to your enemy, especially when
you have brought him under, and to some great advantage; I know not how a man may use
it, when anothers interest depends on it, where you are but accessory and where the
quarrel is not yours. He could never be just nor curteous in hazard of him unto whom he
had lent himself. So was he presently delivered out of the Italian prisons by a speedy and
solemn letter of commendations from our King. Oh, indiscreet nation! We are not
contented to manifest our follies and bewray our vices to the world by reputation; but we
go into forraigne nations, and there in person show them. Place three Frenchmen in the
deserts of Libya, and they will never live one moneth together without brawling, falling
out, and scratching one another; you would say this peregrination is a party erected to
please strangers with our tragedies; and those most commonly who rejoice and scoffe at
our evils. We travel into Italie to learne the art of fencing, and practise it at the cost of our
lives, before we know it; it were requisite, according to the order of true discipline, we
should prefer the theorike before the practike. We betray our apprentisage.
Primitiæ iuvenum miseræ, bellique futuri
Dura rudimenta. -- Stat. Sylv. v.
The miserable first essayes of youth
And hard beginnings of war that ensu’th.
I know it is an art profitable to her end (in the single combate betweene the two Princes,

cosin-Germans, in Spain, the eldest of which (says T. Livius) by the skil of his weapons,
and by craft, overcame easily the dismayed forces of the younger) and as by experience I
have knowen the knowledge and skil whereof has puffed the heart of some beyond their
natural proportion. But it is not properly a virtue, since she draweth her stay from
dexteritie and takes her foundation from other than from herself. The honor of
combates consisteth in the jealousie of the heart, not of the science. And therefore have I
seen some of my friends, renowned for great Masters in this exercise, in their quarrels to
make choice of weapons that might well take the meane of this advantage or oddes from
them; and which wholly depend on fortune and assurance that their victory might not
rather be imputed to their fencing then ascribed to their valor. And in my infancy our
nobility scorned the reputation of a fencer, though never so cunning, as injurious; and if
any learnt it they would sequester themselves from company, deeming the same as a
mystery of craft and subtility, derogating from true and perfect virtue.
Non scntivar, non parar, non ritirarsi
Voglion costor, ne qui destrezza ha parte;
Non danno i colpi finti hor pie ni, hor scarsi;
Togli l’ira e’l furor l’uso dell’arte,
Odi le spade horribilmente urtarsi
A mezzo il ferro, il pie d’orma non parte,
Sempre e il pie fermo, e la man sempre in moto,
Ne scende taglio in van, ne punta a voto. -- Tasso, Gier. can. xii. stan. 55.
T’ avoyde, toward retiring to give ground
They reke not, nor has nimblenes here part,
Nor give false blowes, nor full, nor scarce, nor sound,
Rage and revenge bereave all use of arte . T
heir Swordes at halfe Sword horribly resound
You might hear mette: No foote from steppe does parte:
Their foote still fast, their hand still faster mooveth:
No stroke in vain, no thrust in vain, but prooveth.
Shooting at Buts, Tilting, Torneyes, Barriers, the true images of martiall combats, were
the exercises of our forefathers. This other exercise is so much the less noble, by how
much it respecteth but a private end: which against the laws of justice teacheth us to
destroy one another, and every way produces ever mischievous effects. It is much more
worthy and better beseeming for a man to exercise himself in things that assure and
offend not our Commonwealth and which respect public securitie and general glory.
Publius Rutilius was the first that ever instituted the Souldier to manage his arms by
dexteritie and skil, and joined art onto virtue, not for the use of private contentions, but
for the wars and Roman peoples quarrels; a popular and civill manner of fencing; and
besides the example of Cæsar, who appointed his Souldier, above all things, to aime and
strike at the face of Pompeyes men in the battle of Pharsalia: a thousand other

Chieftaines and Generals have devised new fashions of weapons and new kindes of
striking, and covering of themselves, according as the present affairs require. But even as
Philopoemen condemned wrestling, wherein he excelled others, forasmuch as the
preparations appertaining to this exercise differed from those that belong to military
discipline, to which he supposed men of honor should amuse and addict themselves, me
thinkes also that this nimblenesse or agilitie to which men fashion and enure themselves,
their Iimbes, their turnings, windings, and nimble-quick motions wherein youth is
instructed and trained in this new schoole, are not only unprofitable but rather contrary
and domageable for the use of militarie combat: And we see our men do commonly
employ particular weapons in their fence schools, and peculiarly appointed for that
purpose. And I have seen it dis-allowed that a gentleman chalenged to fight with rapier
and dagger should present himself in the equipage of a man at arms; or that another
should offer to come with his cloake instead of a dagger. It is worthy the noting that
Lachez in Plato, speaking of an apprentisage how to manage arms conformable to ours,
says he could never see any notable warrior come of a school of fence, and especially
from among the maisters. As for them our own experience confirmes as much. And for
the rest we may at least say they are sufficiencies of no relation or correspondency. And in
the institution of the children of this Commonwealth, Plato interdicts the artes of striking
or playing with fists devised by Amycus and Epeius, and to wrestle invented by Antoeus
and Cecyo: because they aime at another end then to adapt youth to warlike service, and
have no afflilition with it. But I digresse much from my theame. The Emperor Mauricius
being forwarned by dreames and sundry prognostications that one Phocas a souldier at
that time yet unknown, should kill him, demanded of Philip his son in law who that
Phocas was, his nature, his conditions and customs, and how amongst other things Philip
told him he was a faint, cowardly, and timorous fellow. The Emperor thereby presently
concluded that he was both cruel and a murtherer. What makes tyrants so blood-thirstie? it
is the care of their securities and that their faint-hart yields them no other means to
assure themselves then by rooting out those which may in any sort offend them; indeed, silly
women, for fear that they should or bite or scratch them:
Cuncta ferit dum cuncta timet. -- Claud. in Eutrop. i. 182.
Of all things he afraide,
At all things fiercely laide.
The first cruelties are exercised by themselves, thence proceedeth the fear of a just
revenge, which afterward produces that swarme of new cruelties; by the one to stifle the
other. Philip, the King of Macedon, who had so many crowes to pul with the Romanes,
agitated by the horror of so many murthers committed by his appointment, and unable to
make his partie good, or to take any safe resolution against so many families, by him at
severall times injured, resolved at last to seize upon al their children whom he had caused
to be murthered, that so he might day by day one after another rid the world, of them, and
so establish his safety. Matters of worth are not impertinent wherever they be placed. I,

who rather respect the weight and benefite of discourses then their order and placing, need
not fear to place here at randome a notable story. When they are so rich of their own
beautie, and may very well uphold themselves alone, I am content with a haires end, to
fitte or join them to my purpose. Amongst others who had been condemned by Philip
was one Herodicus, Prince of the Thessalians: after whom he caused his two sons in
lawe to be put to deathe, each of them leaving a young son behind. Theoxena and Arco
were the two widdowes. Theoxena, although she were instantly urged thereunto, could
never be induced to marry again. Arco took to husband Poris, a chief man amongst the
Æneans, and by him had diverse children, all which she left very young. Theoxena, moved
by a motherly charitie toward her young nephews, and so to have them in her protection
and bringing up, wedded Poris. Vpon this came out the proclamation of the Kings edict.
This noble-minded mother, distrusting the Kings crueltie and fearing the mercilesness of
his satelities or officers towards these noble, hopefull and tender youths, feared not to say
that she would rather kil them with her own hands then deliver them. Poris, amazed at
her protestations, promiseth her secretly to convey them to Athens, there by some of his
faithful friends to be kept safely. They take occasion of a yearly feast which to the honor
of Æneas was solemnized at Ænea, and thither they go, where having all day long
assisted at the ceremonies and public banket, night being come, they convay themselves
into a shippe appointed for that purpose in hope to save themselves by sea. But the winde
fell out so contrary that the next morning they found themselves in view of the town
whence the night before they had hoisted sailes, where they were pursued by the garders
and soldiers of the port. Which Poris perceiving, laboured to hasten and encourage the
mariners to shift away: but Tbeoxena, engaged through love and revenge, remembring her
first resolution, prepared both weapons and poisons, and presenting them to their sight,
thus she bespake them: ’Oh my dear children, take a good heart; death is now the only
meane of your defense and liberty, and shall be a just cause unto the Gods for their holy
justice. These bright keen blades, these full cuppes shall free you the passage unto it.
Courage therefore, and you my eldest child take this sword to die the strongest death.’
Who on the one side having so undaunted a perswader, and on the other their enemies
ready to cut their throats in furious manner, ranne all to that which came next to his hand;
and so all goared and panting were throwne into the sea. Theoxena, proud she had so
gloriously provided for her children’s safety, lovingly embraced her husband, said thus
unto him: ’Oh my dear heart, let us follow these boyes, and together with them enjoy one
self-same grave;’ and so close-claspe together they flung themselves into the main: so
that the ship was brought to shore again, but empty of her maisters. Tyrants, to act two
things together, that is, to kill and cause their rage to be felt, have employed the utmost of
their skill to devise lingering deaths. They will have their enemies die, yet not so soone
but that they may have leisure to feel their vengeance. Wherin they are in great
perplexity; for if the torments be over-violent, they are short; if lingring, not grevious
enough. In this they employ their wits and devices, many examples whereof we see in
antiquitie; and I wot not whether we retain some spice of that barbarisme. Whatsoever is
beyond a simple death seems to me meere crueltie. Our justice cannot hope that he
whom the terror of death cannot dismay, be he to be hanged or beheaded, can in any sort

be troubled with the imagination of a languishing fire, of a wheele, or of burning pincers.
And I wot not whether in that meane time we bring him to despair; for what plight can the
soul of man be in that is broken up on a wheele, or, after the old fashion, nailed to a
crosse, and 24 howres together expects his death! Josephus reporteth that whilst the
Roman wars continued in Jewrie, passing by a place where certain Jewes had been
crucified three dayes before, he knew three of his friends amongst them, and having
gotten leave to remove them, two of them died, but the third lived long after.
Chalcondylas, a man of credite, in the memories he left of matters happened in his time
and thereabouts, maketh report of an extreme torment the Emperor Mechmed was often
wont to put in practice, which was by one only blow of a cimitary, or broad Persian
sword, to have men cut in two parts, by the waste of the body, about the diapbragma,
which is a membrane lying overthwart the lower part of the breast, separating the heart
and lights from the stomacke, which caused them to die two deaths at once: and affirmeth
that both parts were seen full of life, to move and stir long time after, as if they had been
in lingering torment. I do not think they felt any great torture in that moving. The
gastliest torments to looke upon are not alwaies the greatest to be endured: and I find
that much more fiercely-horrible, which other historians write, and which he used against
certain Lords of Epirus, whom fair and leasurely he caused to be flayed all over, disposed
by so malicious a dispensation that their lives continued fifteene days in that languor and
anguish. And these two others: Croesus having caused a gentleman to be apprehended,
greatly favoured by Pantaleon his brother, led him in a fullers or clothworkers shoppe,
where with cards and teazles belonging to that trade, he made him to be carded, scraped,
and teazled so long until he died of it. George Sechel, ring-leader of the countrymen of
Polina, who under the title of a Croysada, wrought so many mischiefs, having been
defeated in a battle by the Vayvoda of Transilvania and taken prisoner, was for three
dayes together tyed naked to a wooden horse, exposed to all manner of tortures any man
might devise against him; during which time diverse other prisoners were kept fasting. At
last, he yet living, saw Lucat his dear brother, and for whose safety he sued and
entreated, forced to drinke his blood, drawing all the envie and hatred of his misdeeds
upon himself. And twenty of his most favoured captaines were compelled to feed upon
his flesh, which with their teeth they must teare off and swallow their morsels. The rest of
his body and entrailes, he being dead, were boiled in a pan, and given for food to other of
his followers.




Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXVIII: ALL THINGS HAVE THEIR SEASON.






CHAPTER XXVIII: ALL THINGS HAVE THEIR SEASON.
HOSE who compare Cato the Censor to Cato the Younger that killed
himself, compare two notable natures, and in form neare one unto
another. The first exploited his sundrie waies and excelleth in military
exploits and utilitie of his public vacations. But the youngers virtue
(besides that it were blasphemy in vigor to compare any unto him) was
much more sincere and unspotted. For who will discharge the Censors
of envie and ambition that durst counterchecke the honor of Scipio in
goodnes and all other parts of excellencie, far greater and better than him or any other
man living in his age? Amongst other things reported of him, this is one, that in his eldest
a he gave himself with so earnest a longing to the Greek tong, as if it had been to quench
a long burning thirst, a thing in mine opinion not very honorable in him. It is properly
that which we call doting, or to become a child again. All things have their season indeed
the good and all. And I may say my Paternoster out of season. As T. Quintius Flaminius
was accused, forasmuch as being general of an army, even in the hour of the conflict he
was seen to withdraw himself apart, ammusing,himself to pray God, although he

gained the battle.
Imponit finem sapiens et rebus honestis. -- JUVEN. Sat. vi. 344
A wise-man will use moderation,
Even in things of commendation.
Eudemonidas seeing Xenocrates very old laboriously apply himself in his schoole-
lectures, said, When will this man know something, since he is yet learning? And
Philopoemen, to those who highly extolled King Ptolomey because he daily hardened his
body to the exercise of arms: It is not (said he) a matter commendable in a King of his
age in them to exercise himself, he should now really and substantially employ them.
Wise men say that young men should make their preparations and old men enjoy them.
And the greatest vice they note in us is, that our desires do uncessantly grow yonger and
yonger. We are ever beginning anew to live. Our studies and our desires should
sometimes have a feeling of age. We have a foote in the grave, and our appetites and
pursuits are but new-borne.
Tu secanda marmora
Locas sub ipsum funus, et sepulcri
Immemor, struis domos. -- HOR. Car. 1. ii. ed. xviii.
You, when you should be going to your grave,
Put marble out to work, in houses brave,
Unmindfull of the burial you must have.
The longest of my desseignes does not extend to a whole yeare: now I only apply my
self to make an end: I shake off all my new hopes and enterprises: I bid my last farewell
to all the places I leave, and daily dispossess my self of what I have. Olim jam nec perit
quicquam mihi, nec acquiritur. Plus superest viatici quam viæ (17. 2 SEN. Epist. lxxvii.)
’It is a good while since I neither loose nor get any thing: I have more to bear my
charges then way to go.’
Vixi, et quem de derat cursum fortuna peregi. --VIRG. Æn. 1. iv. 653.
I have liv’d, and the race have past
Wherein my fortune had me plac’t.
To conclude, it is all the case I find in my age, and that it suppresseth many cares and
desires in me wherewith life is much disquieted. The care of the worlds course, the care
of riches, of greatness, of knowledge, of health, and of my self. This man learneth to
speak when he should rather learne to hold his peace for ever. A man may alwaies

continue his study, but not schooling. O fond-foolish for an old man to be ever an
Abecedarian.
Diversos diversa iuvant, non omnibus annis
Omnia conveniunt. ----- CATUL. Eleg. i. 103.
Diverse delights to diverse nor to all
Do all things at all years convenient fall.
If we must needs study, let us study something sorteable to our condition, that we may
answer as he did, who being demanded what his studies would stead him in his decrepity,
answered that he might the better and with more ease leave this world. Such a study was
yong Catoes in forefeeling his approaching end, who lighted upon Platoes discourse on
the soules immortality. Not as it may be supposed that long before he had not stored
himself with all sorts of munition for such a dislodging. Of assurance, of constancy and
instruction, he had more than Plato has in all his writings. His science and his courage
were in this respect above all Philosophy. He undertook this occupation, not for the
service of his death, but as one who did not so much as interrupt his sleep in a deliberation
of such consequence, who ever without choice or change continued his wonted studies,
and all other accustomed actions of his life. The same night wherein the Pretorship was
refused him he passed over in play. That wherein he must die, he spent in reading. The
loss of life or office was all one to him.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXIX: OF VERTUE






CHAPTER XXIX: OF VERTUE
FINDE by experience that there is great difference betweene the
sodaine fits and fantasies of the soul, and a resolute disposition and
constant habitude: and I see there is nothing but we may attaine unto,
indeed, as some say, to exceed Divinitie itself; forasmuch as it is more
to become impassible of himself, then to be so by his originall
condition: and that one may join a resolution and assurance of God to
mens imbecillitie. But it is by fits. And in the lives of those heroes or noble worthies of
former ages, are often found wonderful parts, and which seems greatly to exceed our
natural forces: but they are prankes or parts consonant to truth: and it may hardly be
believed mans soul may so be tainted and fed with those so high-raised conditions, that
onto it they may become as ordinary and natural. It happens unto ourselves, who are but
abortive broods of men, sometimes to rowse our soul far beyond her ordinary pitch, as
stirred up by the discourses or provoked by the examples of others. But it is a kind of
passion which urgeth, mooveth, agitateth, and in some sort ravisheth her from out her
self: for, that gust overblowne and storme past, we see it wil unawares unbend and lose
itself, if not to the lowest pitch, at least to be no more the same she was, so that upon
every slight occasion, for a bird lost or for a glasse broken, we suffer ourselves to be

mooved and distempered very near as one of the vulgar sort. Except order, moderation,
and constancy, I imagine all things may be done by an indifferent and defective man.
Therefore say wise men, that directly to judge of a man, his common actions must
specially be controuled, and he must every day be surprised in his work-day clothes.
Pyrrho, who framed so pleasant a science of ignorance, assaied (as all other true
philosophers) to fashion his life answerable to his doctrine. And forasmuch as he
maintained the weaknesse of mans judgement to be so extreme as it could take nor
resolution nor inclination: and would perpetually suspend it, ballancing, bebolding and
receiving all things as indifferent: it is reported of him that he ever kept himself after one
fashion, looke and countenance. If he had begunne a discourse, he would end it, though
the party to whom he spake were gone: and if he went any where, he would not go an
inche out of his path what let or obstacle soever came in his way; being kept from falls,
from cartes, or other accidents by his friends. For, to fear or shunne any thing had been
to shocke his propositions, which remooved all election and certainty from his very
senses. He sometimes suffered himself to be cut and cautherized with such constancy as
he was never seen so much as to shrug, twitch, move, or winke with his eyes. It is
something to bring the mind to these imagination, but more to joine the effects unto it,
yet is it not impossible. But to joine them with such perseverance and constancy as to
establish it for an ordinary course; verily in these enterprises so far from common use, it
is almost incredible to be done. The reason is this, that he was sometimes found in his
house bitterly scolding with his sister for which being reproved as he that wronged his
indifferencie; ’What!’ said he, ’must this seely woman also serve as a witness to my
rules?’ Another time, being found to defend himself from a dog: ’It is,’ replied he, ’very
hard altogether to dispoile and shake off man;’ and man must endeavor and enforce
himself to resist and confront all things, first by effects, but if the worst befall, by reason
and by discourse. It is now about seven or eight years since, that a country man yet living
not above two leagues from this place, having long before been much vexed and troubled
in mind for his wives jealousies one day coming home from his work, and she after
her accustomed manner welcomming and entertaining him with brawling and scowlding,
as, one unable to endure her any longer, fell into such a moodie rage that sodainely with a
sickle which he held in his hand he clean cut off those parts that were the cause of her
jealousies and flung them in her face. And it is reported that a yong gentleman of France,
amorous and lustie, having by his perseverance at last mollified the heart of his fair
mistresse, desperate, because coming to the point of his so long sued-for businesses he
found himself unable and unprepared, and that as
-----non viriliter
Iners senile penis extulerat caput, --Tib. ad Priap. v. 4.
soone as he came home he deprived himself of it, and sent it as a cruel and bloudy
sacrifice for the expiation of his offence. Had he done it by discourse or for religions sake,
as the priestes of Cybele were wont to do, what might we not say of so haughty an
enterprise? Not long since at Bragerac, five leagues distance from my house, up the river

of Dordaigne, a woman, having the evening before been grievously tormented and sore
beaten by her husband, froward and skittish by complexion, determined, though it should
cost her the price of her life, by one meane or other to escape his rudeness, and rising the
next morning, went as she was accustomed to visite her neighbors, to whom in some sort
she recommended the state of her affairs, then taking a sister of hirs by the hand, ledde her
along until she came upon the bridge that crosseth the river, and having bid her hartily
farewell, as in the way of sport, without shewing any manner of change or alteration,
headlong threw hirselfe down into the river, where she perished. And which is more to be
noted in her is, that this her determination ripened a whole night in her head. But the Indian
wives may not here be forgotten as worthy the noting: whose custom is, that husbands
have many wives, and for her that is dearest unto her husband to kill herself after him:
every one in the whole course of her life endevoreth to obtaine this priviledge and
advantage over all her fellow wives: and in the good offices and duties they show their
husbands, respect no other recompence than to be preferred to accompany them in death.
Ubi mortifero jacta est fax ultima lecto,
------Uxorem fusis, stat pia turba comis:
Et certamen habent Læthi, quæ viva sequator
------Coniugium, pudor est non licuisse mori:
Ardent victrices, et flammæ pectora præbent,
-----Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris -- Propert. iii. El. xii. 17.
When for his death-bed last flame is appli’d
With loose haires many kind wives stand beside,
And strive for death, which alive may be next
Hir wedlocke, who may not, is sham’d and vex’t:
They that orecome, are burn’d, to flames give way,
Their bodies burnt on their burnt husbands lay.
A late Writer affirrneth that himself has seen this custom highly reputed in the new
discovered East Indiaes, where not only the wives are buried with their husbands, but also
such slaves as he has enjoyed, which is done after this manner. The husband being
deceased, the widdow may, if she will (but few do it, request two or three monthes space
to dispose of her busines. The day come, adorned as a sumptuous bride, she mounteth on
horsebacke, and with a cheereful countenance telleth everybody she is going to lie with
her bridegroome, holding in her left hand a looking-glasse, and an arrow in the right. Thus
having a while rid up and down in great pomp and magnificence, accompanied with her
friends and kinsmen, and much concourse of people, in feast and jollitie, she is brought
into a public place, purposely appointed for such spectacles; which is a large open place,
in the middest whereof is a pit or grave full of wood, and near unto it an upraised
scaffold, with foure or five steppes to ascend, upon which she is brought, and served with
a stately and sumptuous banket, which ended, she beginneth to dance and sing, and when
she thinks good, commandeth the fire to be kindled. That done, she commeth down

again, and taking the nearest of her husbands kindred by the hand, they go together to
the next river, where she strippes herself all naked and distributeth her jewels and
cloathes among her friends, then plungeth herself in the water, as if she meant to wash
away her sins; then coming out she enwrappeth herself in a yellow piece of linnen
cloth, about the length of fourteene yards; and giving her band again unto her husbands
kinsmen, they return unto the mount, where she speaks unto the people, to whom (if she
have any) she recommendeth her children. Betweene the pitte and mount there is
commonly a curtaine drawne, lest the sight of that burning furnace might dismay them:
which many, to show the greater courage, wil not have it drawne. Her speech ended, a
woman presenteth her with a vessell ful of oyl, therewith to annoint her head and body,
which done, she casteth the rest into the fire, and therewithall sodainly flings herself into
it: which is no sooner done but the people cast great stors of faggots and billets upon her,
lest she should languish over-long: and all their joy is converted into grief and sorrow. If
they be persons of meane quality, the dead mans body is carried to the place where they
intend to bury him, and there he is placed sitting; his widdow kneeling before him with
her arms close about his middle, and so keepeth hirself whilst a wall is erected up about
them both, which raised to the height of her shoulders, some of her kindred taking her by
the head behind, wrings her neck about, and having given the last gasp, the wall is
immediately made up close over their heads, wherein they remain buried. In the same
country there was something like to this in their Gymnosophists, or wise men, who not by
menaces or compulsions of others, nor by the violence of a sodaine humor, but by the
express and voluntary profession of their rule, their manner was according as they attained
unto a certain age, or saw themselves threatned by some sicknesse, to cause a pile of
wood to be erected and upon it a rich bedde; and having cheerfully feasted their friends
and acquaintance, with such a resol ution laid themselves down in that bed, that fire set
unto it, they were never seen to stir nor hand nor foot; and thus died one of them named
Calanus in the presence of all the army of Alexander the Great. And who had not so made
himself away was neither esteemed holy nor absolutely happy among them; sending his
soul purged and purified by fire after it had consumed whatsoever was mortal and
terrestrial in it. This constant premeditation of al the life is that which makes the wonder.
Amongst our other disputation, that of Fatum has much entermedled itself: and to join
future things and our wil itself unto a certain unavoydable necessitie, we yet stand upon
that argument of former times: since God forseeth al things must thus happen, as
undoubtedly he doeth: they must then necessarily happen so. To which our clarks and
maisters answere, that to see any thing come to pass as we do, and likewise God (for
he being present in ful essence rather seeth than foreseeth), is not to force the same to
happen: indeed we see because things come to pass, but things happen not because we see.
The hapning makes the science or knowledge, and not knowledge the happening. What we
see come to pass, happeneth; but it might come to pass otherwise. And God in the
eternall register of the causes of happenings, which he has in his prescience, has also
those which are called casual; and the voluntary, which depend of the liberty he has
given unto our free will, and knows we shall faile, because our will shall have been to
faile. I have seen diverse encourage their troupes with this fatall necessitie; for, if our hour

be tied unto a certain point neither the musket-shottes of our enemy, nor our courage,
nor our flight and cowardice can either advance or recoyle the same.
This may well be said, but seek you who shall effect it: and if it be so that a strong and
lively faith does likewise draw action after it: truely this faith (wherewith we so much fil
our mouthes) is marvelous light in our times, except the contempt it has of works, make
her disdaine their company. So it is that to the same purpose the Lord of Joinville, as
credible a witness as any other, tells us of the Bedoins, a nation intermingled with the
Saracine, with whom our King Saint Lewis had to deale in the holy land who so
confidently believed in their religion the dayes of every one to be prefixed and numbred
from all eternity by an inevitable preordinance, that they went al bare and naked to the
wars except a Turkish glaive in their hand, and their body covered but with a white
linnen cloth: and for the bitterest curse, if they chanced to fall out one with another, they
had ever in their mouth: ’Cursed be then as he that armeth himself for fear of death.’
Here is another manner of trial or a belief or faith then ours. In this rank may likewise be
placed that which those two religious men of Florence not long since gave unto their
countrymen. Being in some controversie betweene themselves about certain points of
learning, they accorded to go both into the fire in the presence of al the people and in the
open market place, each one for the verifying of his opinion; and all preparations were
ready made and execution to be performed, but that by an unexpected accident it was
interrupted. A yong Turkish Lord, having achieved a notable piece of service in arms and
with his own person in ful view of the two battles between Ammurath and Huniades ready
to be joined together, being demanded by Ammurath his prince, who being so yong and
inexperienced (for it was the first war or service he had seen before) had replenished
him with so generous and undanted vigor of courage, answered that a hare had been his
soveraigue maister and only teacher of valor; and thus began his speech: Being one day
a hunting, I found a hare sitting in her form, and although I had a brace of excellent
good greyhounds with me in a slip or leash, I thought it good, because I would be sure of
my same to use my bow; for she was a very fair marke. I begaune to shoot my arrows at
her, which I did to the number of fortie (for in my quiver were just so many), yet could I
never hurt her, no not so much as start her. After all this I let slip my grayhounds, who
could do no more than I had done: by which I learnt that she had been sheltred and
defended by her destinie; and that no glaives nor arrows never hit but by the permission
of our fatalitie, which it lieth not in us to avoide or to advance. This story may serve to
make us perceive by the way how flexible our reason is to all sorts of objects. A notable
man, great in years, in name, in dignity, and in learning, vaunted himself unto me, that
he was induced to a certain most important change of his religion by a strange and
fantastical incitation: and in al things so il concluding that I deemed the same stronger and
more forcible being taken contrary. He termed it a miracle, and so did I, but in a different
sense. Their historians say that persuasion having popularly been scattered amongst the
Turkes of the fatal and inflexible prescription of their dayes, does apparently aide to
warrant and embolden them in dangers. And I know a great Prince who happily thrives by
it, be it he believe it or take it for an excuse to hazard himself extraordinarily; provided
fortune be not soone wearie to favor and backe him. There has not happened in our

memory a more admirable effect of resolution than of those two villaines that conspired
the death of the Prince of Orange: it is strange how the last who performed the same could
be induced or encouraged to undergo such an enterprize, wherein his fellow (though he
had resolutely attempted it and had all might be required for such an action) had so ill
success and miscarried. And in those steps and with the same weapons to go and
undertake a Lord, armed with so late an instruction of distrust; mighty in friends and
followers, puissant of bodily strength, in his own hall, amiddest his servants and guarde,
and in a city wholly at his devotion. It must of force be said that in performing it he
employed a well-directed and resolute band and a dreadlesse courage, mooved by a
vigorous passion. A poynard is more sure to wound a man, which forasmuch as it
requireth more motion and vigor of the arm than a pistol, its stroke is more subject to be
hindred or avoyded. That the first ranne not to an assured death I make no great doubt, for
the hopes wherewith he might be entertained could not harbour in a well-setled and
resolute midde, and the conduct of his exploit sheweth he wanted no more that then
courage. The motions of so forcible a persuasion may be diverse, for our fantasia
disposeth of herself and of us as she pleaseth. The execution committed near Orleans
had no coherence with this wherein was more hazard than vigor; the blow was not mortal
had not fortune made it so, and the enterprise to shoote on horsebacke and far-off, and to
one who mooved still according to the motion of his horse, was the attempt of a man that
rather loved to misse of his effect then faile to save himself. What followed did
manifestly show it; for he was so amazed and drunken with the thought of so haughty an
execution, as he lost all his senses, both to work his escape and direct his tongue in his
answers. What needed he have done more then recover his friends by crossing of a river?
It is a meane wherein I have cast my self in far less dangers; and which I think of
small hazard, how broad soever, alwayes provided your horse find an easy entrance, and
on the further side you forsee an easy and shallow landing, according to the course of the
streame of the water. The second, when the horrible sentence was pronounced against
him, answered stoutly: I was prepared for it, and I shall amaze you with my patience. The
Assassines, a nation depending of Phoenicia, are esteemed among the Mahometists of a
sovereign devotion and puritie of maners: they hold that the readiest and shortest way to
gain Paradise is to kill some one of a contrary religion; therefore has it often been
seen that one or two in their bare doublets have undertaken to assault mighty enemies
with the price of an assured death and without any care of their own danger. And thus was
our Earle Raymond of Tripoli murthered or assassinated (this word is borrowed from their
name) in the middest of his citie, daring the time of our wars in the holy land; and
likewise Conrade Marquis of Montferrat his murtherers being brought to their torture,
were seen to swell with pride that they had performed so worthy an exploit.




Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXX: OF A MONSTROUS CHILD.






CHAPTER XXX: OF A MONSTROUS CHILD.
HIS discourse shall pass single, for I leave it to Physitians to treat of. I
saw two dayes since a child whom two men and a nurse (which named
themselves to be his father, his uncle, and his aunt) carried about with
intent to get some money with the sight of him, by reason of his
strangenesse. In all the rest he was as other children are: he stood upon
his feete, went and prattled in a manner as all others of his age. He
would never take nourishment but by his nurses breast; and what in my
presence was offred to be put in his mouth he chewed a little and put it all out again. His
puling differed somewhat from others: he was just fourteene monthes olde. Under his paps
he was fastned and joined to another child, but had no head, and who had the conduite of
his backe stopped; the rest whole. One of his arms was shorter than the other, and was by
accident broken at their birth. They were joined face to face, and as if a little child would
embrace another somewhat bigger. The joyning and space whereat they were closed
together was but foure inches broad, or thereabouts; in such sort that if you thrust up the
imperfect child you might see under the others navill; and the seame was betweene the

paps and his navill. The navill of the imperfect one could not be seen, but all the rest of
his belly might. Thus, what of the imperfect one was not joined, as arms, buttocks,
thighes, and legs, did hang and shake upon the other, whose length reached to the
middle-leg of the other perfect. His nurse told me he made water by both privities. The
members of the little one were nourished, living, and in the same state as the others,
except only they were less and thinner. This double body nd these different members,
having reference to one only head, might serve for a favorable prognostication to our
King to maintaine the factions and different parties of this our kingdome under a unitie of
the laws. But least the success should prove it contrary, it is not amisse to let him run
his course; for in things already past there need no divination. Vt quum facta sun t, tum ad
conjecturam aliquid interpretatione revocantur:(Cic. Divin. ii.) ’So as when they are done
they then by some construction should be revoked to conjecture.’ As it is reported of
Epimenides, who ever devined backward. I come now from seeing of a shepherd at
Medoc, of thirty years of age or thereabouts, who had no signe at all of genitorie parts,
but where they should be are three little holes by which his water does continually tril
from him. This poore man has a beard, and desires still to be fumbling of women. Those
which we call monsters are not so with God, who in the immensitie of his work seeth the
infinite of formes therein contained. And it may be thought that any figure does amaze us,
has relation unto some other figure of the same kind, although unknown unto man.
From out his all-seeing wisdom proceedeth nothing but good, common, regular, and
orderly; but we neither see the sorting, nor conceive the relation. Quod crebro videt, non
miratur, etiam si, cur fiat, nescit. Quod an te non vidit, id, si evenerit, ostentum esse
censet (CIC. Div. 1. II.). ’That which he often seeth he does not wonder at, though he know
not why it is done; but if that happen which he never saw before, he thinkes it some
portentous wonder.’ We call that against nature which commeth against custom. There is
nothing, whatsoever it be, that is not according to her. Let therefore this universall and
natural reason chase from us the error, and expell the astonishment which noveltie
breedeth and strangenes causeth in us.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXXI: OF ANGER AND CHOLER






CHAPTER XXXI: OF ANGER AND CHOLER
LUTARKE is everywhere admirable, but especially where he judgeth
of humane actions. The notable things he reporteth may be perceived in
the comparison of Lycurgus and Numa, speaking of the great simplicity
we commit in leaving long children under the government and charge
of their fathers and parents. Most of our policies or commonwealths,
says Aristotle (as the Cyclopes were wont) commit the conduct of their
wives and charge of their children to all men, according to their foolish humor or
indiscreete fantasies. And well-nigh none but the Lacedemonian and Cretensian have
resigned the discipline of children to the laws. Who seeth not that in an estate all things
depend of nurture and education? And all the while, without discretion, it is wholly left to
the parents mercy how foolish and wicked soever they be. Amongst other things, how
often (walking through our streets) have I desired to have a play or comedie made in
revenge of young boyes, which I saw thumpt, misused, and well-nigh murthered by some
harebrained, moodie, and through choler-raging fathers and mothers, from out whose eyes
a man might see sparkles of rage to startle.

------ rabie jecur incendente feruntur
Præcipites, ut saxa jugis abrupta, quibus mons
Subtrahitur, clivoque latus pendente recedit: -- JUV. Sat. vi. 548.
They headlong run with rage, which does enflame their livers
Like stones that broken fall from mountaine tops in shivers,
The hill withdrawes, and they are rould
From hanging cliffe which leaves their hold
(And according to Hypocrates, the most dangerous infirmities are those which disfigure
the face), and with a loud thundring voice often to follow children that came but lately
from nurse, which after prove lame, maimed, blockish and dull-pated with blowes; and yet
our laws makes no accompt of it, as if these spraines and unjoyntings of limbes, or these
maimes were no members of our commonwealth.
Gratum est quod patrim civem populoque dedisti,
Si facis ut patriæ sit idoneus, utilis aqris,
Vtilis et bellorum et pacis rebus agendis. -- Juv. Sat. xiv. 70.
That you to th’countrie give a man, ’tis acceptable,
If for the countrie fit you make him, for fields able,
Of peace and war for all achievements profitable.
There is no passion so much transports the sinceritie of judgement as does anger. No
man would make conscience to punish that judge by death who in rage or choler had
condemned an offender. And why should fathers be allowed to beate or schoolmasters be
suffered to whip children, or to punish them, being angry? It is no longer correction, but
revenge. Punishment is unto children as physicke, and would any man endure a physician
that were angrie and wroth against his patient? Our selves (did we well), during the time
of our anger, should never lay hands on our servants. So long as our pulse panted, and we
feel any concitation, so long remit we the partie: and things will seem far otherwise unto
us if we once come to our senses again, and shall better bethinke us. Then is it passion that
commandes. It is passion that speaks, and not we. Athwart it, faults seem much greater
unto us, as bodies do athwart a foggy mist. Whoso is hungry useth meat, but whoso will
use chastisement should never hunger nor thirst after it. Moreover, corrections given with
discretion and moderation are more gently received, and with more good to him that
receiveth them. Otherwise he shall never think to have been justly condemned by a
man who is transported by rage and choler, and for his justification alleadgeth the
extraordinary motions of his maister, the inflammation of his face, his unwonted oaths, his
chafing, his unquietnesse, and his rash precipitation.

Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sanguine venæ:
Lumina Gorgoneo sævius igne micant. -- OVID. Art. Am. 1. iii. 53.
The face with anger swelles, the veines grow blacke with blood,
The eyes more fiercely shine than Gorgons fierie moode.
Suetonius writeth that Caius Rabirius, having by Cæsar been condemned, nothing did him
so much good towards the people (to whom he appealed) to make him obtain his suit, as
the sharpnes and over-boldnes which Cæsar had declared in that judgement. Saying is one
thing, and doing another. A man must consider the sermon apart and the preacher severall.
Those have made themselves good sport who in our dayes have gone about to checke the
veritie of our Church by the ministers vice: she fetcheth her testimony from elsewhere. It
is a foolish manner of arguing, and which would soone reduce all things to a confusion.
An honest man may sometimes have false opinions, and a wicked man may preach truth:
indeed such a one as beleeves it not. Verily it is a pleasing harmonie when doing and saying
go together. And I will not deny but saying when deeds follow is of more efficacie and
authority: as said Eudamidas when he heard a philosopher discourse of war: these
speeches are good, but he that speaks them is not to be beleeved, for his ears were never
accustomed to hear the clang of trumpets nor rattling of drums. And Cleomenes, hearing
a rhetoritian speak of valor, burst out into an extreme laughter; whereat the other being
offended, he said unto him: ’I would do as much if it were a swallow should speak of it,
but were be an eagle I should gladly hear him.’ Me seems I perceive in ancient mens
writings that he who speaks what he thinketh toucheth nearer the quick than he who
counterfeits. Heare Cicero speak of the love of liberty, then listen to Brutus: their wordes
will tell you and sound in your eare, the latter was a man readie to purchase it with the
price of his life. Let Cicero, that father of eloquence, treate of the contempt of death, and
let Seneca discourse of the same; the first draws it on languishing, and would faine
resolve you of a thing whereof he has not yet resolved himself. He gives you no heart,
for himself has none: whereas the other does rowze, animate, and inflame you. I never
looke upon an author, be they such as write of virtue and of actions, but I curiously
endeavor to find out what he was himself. For the Ephori of Sparta, hearing a dissolute
liver propose a very beneficial advise unto the people, commanded him to hold his peace,
and desired an honest man to assume the invention of it unto himself, and to propound it.
Plutarkes compositions, if they be well savored, do plainely manifest the same unto us:
and I am persuaded I know him inwardly: yet would I be glad we had some memories of
his own life: and by the way I am falne into this discourse, by reason of the thanks I owe
unto Aulus Gellius, in that he has left us written this story of his manners, which fitteth
my story of anger. A slave of his, who was a lewd and vicious man, but yet whose ears
were somewhat fedde with philosophicall documents, having for some faults by him
committed, by the commandement of Plutarke his master been stripped naked, whilst
another servant of his whipped him, grumbled in the beginning that he was whipped
without reason and had done nothing: but in the end mainly crying out, he fell to railing
and wronging his master, upbraiding him that he was not a true Philosopher, as he vanted

himself to be, and how he had often heard him say that it was an unseemely thing in a man
to be angry. And that he had made a book of it: and now, all plunged in rage and
engulf’ed in choler, to cause him so cruelly to be beaten was cleane contrary to his own
writing. To whom Plutarke, with an unaltered and mild-setled countenance, said thus
unto him: ’What, you raskall, whereby doest you judge I am now angrie? Does my
countenance, does my voice, does my colour, or does my speech give you any testimony
that I am either moved or cholericke? Mee seems mine eyes are not staringly wild, nor
my face troubled, nor voice frightful or distempered. Doe I waxe red? Do I foame at the
mouth? Does any word escape me I may repent hereafter? Doe I startle and quake? Doe I
rage and ruffle with anger? For to tell you true, these are the right signes of choler and
tokens of anger.’ Then turning to the party that whipped him: ’Continue still your work,’
quoth he, whilst this fellow and I dispute of the matter.’ This is the report of Gellius.
Architas Tarentinus returning from a war where he had been captaine general, found
his house all out of order, husbandrie all spoiled, and by the ill government of his bailiffe,
his ground all waste and unmanured; and having called for him, said thus: ’Away, bad
man, for if I were not angrie I would have you whipt for this.’ Plato likewise being vexed
and angrie with one of his slaves, commanded Speusippus to punish him, excusing
himself that now being angrie he would not lay hands upon him. Charilus the
Lacedemonian, to an Helot who behaved himself over insolently and audaciously
towards him, by the Gods (says he) if I were not now angrie I would presently make you
die. It is a passion which pleaseth and flattereth itself. How many times being moved by
any false suggestion, if at that instant we be presented with any lawfull defense or true
excuse, do we fall into rage against truth and innocencie itself? Touching this purpose,
I have retained a wonderful example of antiquitie. Piso, in diverse other respects a man of
notable virtue, being angrie, and chafing with one of his soldiers, who returning from
forage or boothbaling, could not give him an accompt where he had left a fellow-souldier
of his, and thereupon concluding he had killed or made him away, forthwith condemned
him to be hanged. And being upon the gallowes and ready to dye behold his companion
who had stragled abroade, coming home, whereat all the army rejoiced very much, and
after many embracings and signes of joy between the two soldiers, the hangman brought
both unto Piso, all the company hoping it would be a great pleasure unto him; but it fell
out cleane contrary, for through shame and spite, his wrath, still burning, was redoubled,
and with a slie devise his passion instantly presented to his mind, he made three guiltie,
forasmuch as one of them was found innocent, and caused them all three to be
dispatched: the first souldier because he was alreadie condemned; the second, which had
stragled abroade, by reason he was the cause of his fellowes death; and the hangman for
that he had not fulfilled his generalls commandement. Those who have to deale with
froward and skittish women have no doubt seen what rage they will fall into, if when
they are most angrie and chafing a man be silent and patient, and disdains to foster their
anger and wrath. Celius the orator was by nature exceedingly fretfull and cholerike. To
one who was with him at supper, a man of a mild and gentle conversation, and who
because he would not move him, seemed to approve whatever he said, and yield to him in
every thing, as unable to endure his peevishness should so pass without some

nourishment, burst out into a rage and said unto him: ’For the love of God, deny me
something, that we may be two.’ So women are never angrie but to the end a man should
again be angrie with them, therein imitating the laws of love. Phocion to a man who
troubled his discourse with brawling and scolding at him in most injurious manner, did
nothing else but hold his peace, and give him what leisure he would to vent his choler,
which done, without taking any notice of it, began his discourse again where he had left
it off. There is no reply so sharpe as such silent contempt. Of the most cholerlike and
testie man of France (which is ever an imperfection, but more excusable in a military man,
for it must needs be granted there are in that profession some men who cannot well
avoyde it) I ever say he is the patientest man I knowe to bridle his choler; it mooveth and
transporteth him with such fury and violence --
------ magno veluti cum flamma sonore
Virgea suggeritur costis undantis aheni,
Exultantque æstu latices, furit intus aquai
Fumidus atque alte spumis exuberat amnis,
Nec jam se capit unda, volat vapor ater ad auras -- VIRG. Æn. 1. vii. 462.
As when a fagot flame with hurring sounds
Under the ribbes of boyling cauldron lies,
The water swelles with heat beyond the bounds,
Whence streaming streames raging and foaming rise,
Water out-runs itself, blacke vapours flye to skies --
that he must cruelly enforce himself to moderate the same. And for my part I know noe
passion I were able to smother with such temper and abide with such resolution. I would
not set wisdom at so high a rate. I respect not so much what he does as how much it cost
him not to do worse. Another boasted in my presence of his behaviours order and
mildness, which in truth is singular. I tolde him that indeed it was much, namely, in men
of so eminent a quality as himself was, on whom all eyes are fixed, alwaies to show
himself in a good temper; but that the chiefest point consisted in providing inwardly and
for himself; and that in mine opinion it was no discreet part inwardly to fret: which, to
maintaine that marke and formall outward appearance, I feared he did. Choler is
incorporated by concealing and smothering the same, as Diogenes said to Demosthenes,
who fearing to be seen in a taverne withdrew himself into the same. The more you
recoylest backe, the further you goest into it. I would rather persuade a man, though
somewhat out of season, to give his boy a wherrat on the eare, then to dissemble this wise,
sterile or severe countenance, to vex and fret his mind. And I would rather make show of
my passions then smother them to my cost, which being vented and exprest, become more
languishing and weake: better it is to let its pointe work outwardly, then bend it against
ourselves. Omnia vitia in aperto leviora aunt: et tunc perniciosissima, quum simulata
sanitate subsidunt; (SEN. Epist. lvi.) ’All vices are then less perilous when they lie open
to be seen, but then most pernitious when they lurke under counterfeited soundenesse.’ I

ever warne those of my household who by their offices-authority may sometimes have
occasion to be angry, first to husband their anger, then not employ it upon every slight
cause; for that impeacheth the effect and worth of it. Rash and ordinary brawling is
converted to a custom, and thats the reason each man contemnes it. That which you
employ against a servant for any theeving is not perceived, because it is the same he has
sundry times seen you use against him if he have not washt a glasse well or misplaced a
stoole. Secondly, that they be not angry in vain, but ever have regard their chiding come
to his ears with whom they are offended; for commonly some will brawle before he come
in their presence, and chide a good while after he is gone --
Et secure petulans amentia certat, -- CLAUD. in Eu. 1. i. 48.
Madnesse makes with itself a fray,
Which fondly does the wanton play --
and avenge their anger against his shadow, and make the storme fall where no man is
either chastised or interested, but with the rumour of their voice, and sometimes with such
as cannot do withall. I likewise blame those who being angry will brave and mutiny
when the partie with whom they are offended is not by. These Rodomontados must be
employed on such as fear them.
Mugitus veluti cum prima in prælia taurus
Terrificos ciet, atqui irasci in cornua tentat,
Arboris obnixus trunco, ventosque lacessit
Ictibus, et sparsa ad pugnam proludit arena. -- VIRG. Æn. 1. xii. 103.
As when a furious bull to his first combats mooves
His terror-breeding lowes, his horne to anger prooves,
Striving against a trees trunke, and the wind with strokes,
His preface made to fight with scattered sand, provokes.
When I chance to be angrie it is in the earnestest manner that may be, but yet as briefly
and as secretly as is possible. I lose my self in hastiness and violence, but not in trouble.
So that let me spend all manner of injurious words at randome and without all heed, and
never respect, to place my points pertinently, and where they may do most hurt: for
commonly I employ nothing but my tongue. My boyes scape better cheape in great
matters then in small trifles. Slight occasions surprise me, and the mischief is that after
you are once falne into the pits it is no matter who thrusts in, you never cease till you
come to the bottome. The fall presseth, hasteneth, mooveth, and furthereth itself. In great
occasions I am pleased that they are so just, that every body expects a reasonable anger to
insue. I glorify my self to deceive their expectation. Against these I bandy and prepare
my self; they make me summon up my wits and threaten to carry me very far if I would

follow them. I easily keep my self from falling into them, and if I stay for them I am
strong enough to reject the impulsion of this passion, what violent cause soever it has.
But if it seize upon and once preoccupate me, what vain cause soever it has, it does
cleane transport me: I condition thus with those that may contest with me, when you
perceive me to be first angry, be it right or wrong, let me hold on my course, I will do the
like to you whenever it shall come to my lot. There is not engendred but by the
concurrence of cholers, which are easily produced one of another, and are not borne at one
instant. Let us allow every man his course, so shall we ever be in peace. Oh profitable
prescription, but of an hard execution! I shall sometime seem to be angry for the order
and direction of my house, without any just emotion. According as my age yieldeth my
humors more sharp and peevish, so do I endeavor to oppose my self against them and if
I can I will hereafter enforce my self to be less froward and not so testy, as I shall have
more excuse and inclinations to be so; although I have heretofore been in their number
that are least. A word more to conclude this chapter: Aristotle says choler does sometimes
serve as arms unto Vertue and Valor. It is very likely: notwithstanding such as gainsay
him, answer pleasantly, it is a weapon of a new fashion and strange use. For we moove
other weapons but this mooveth us; our hand does not guide it, but it directeth our hand; it
holdeth us, and we hold not it.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXXII: A DEFENCE OF SENECA AND PLUTARKE.






CHAPTER XXXII: A DEFENCE OF SENECA AND PLUTARKE.
HE familiarity I have with these two men, and the aid they affoord me
in my old age, and my book meerely framed of their spoiles, bindeth
me to wed and maintaine their honor. As for Seneca, amongest a
thousand petty pamphlets those of the pretended reformed religion have
published, for the defense of their cause, which now and then proceede
from a good hand, and which, pity it is, it should not be employed in
more serious and better subjects, I have heretofore seen one who, to
prolong and fill up the similitude he would find betweene the government of our
unfortunate late King Charles the Ninth and that of Nero, compareth the whilom Lord
Cardinall of Lorraine, unto Seneca; their fortunes to have been both chief men in the
government of their Princes, and therewithall their manners, their conditions, and their
demeanours. Wherein (in mine opinion) he does the said Lord Cardinall great honor: for
although I be one of those that highly respect his spiri,t his worth, his eloquence, his zeale
towards his religion, and the service of his King; and his good fortune to have been borne
in an age wherein he was so new, so rare, and therewithall so necessary for the

commonwealth, to have a clergie man of such dignitie and nobility, sufficient and capable
of so weighty a charge; yet to confesse the truth, I esteeme not his capacitie such, nor his
virtue so exquisitely unspotted, nor so entire or constante as that of Seneca. Now this
book whereof I speak, to come to his intention, maketh a most injurious description of
Seneca, having borrowed his reproaches from Dion the historian, to whose testimony I
give no credit at all: for besides he is inconstant, as one who after he has called Seneca
exceeding wise, and shortly after termed him a mortal enemy to Neroes vices, in other
places makes him covetous, given to usurie, ambitious, base-minded, voluptuous, and
under false pretences and feigned shewes, a counterfet philosopher; his virtue appeareth so
lively, and wisdom so vigorous in his writings, and the defense of these imputations is
so manifest, as well of his riches as of his excessive expences, that I believe no witness to
the contrary . Moreover, there is great reason we should rather give credit to Roman
historians in such things then to Græcians and strangers, whereas Tacitus and others
speak very honourably of his life and death, and in other circumstance declare him to
have been a most excellent and rarely vertuous man, I wil alleadge no other reproach
against Dions judgement then this, which is unavoydable; that is, his understanding of the
Roman affairs is so weake and il advised as he dareth defend and maintaine Juli us
Cæsars cause against Pompey, and blusheth not to justify Antonius against Cicero. But let
us come to Plutarke. John Bodin is a good modern author, and endowed with much more
judgement then the common rabble of scriblers and blur-papers which now adayes stuffe
stationers shops, and who deserveth to be judged, considered, and had in more then
ordinary esteeme. Nevertheless I find him somewhat malapert and bolde in that passage
of his ’Methode of Historie,’ when he accuses Plutarke, not onl y of ignorance (wherein I
would have let him say his pleasure, for that is not within my element, but also that he
often writeth things altogether incredible and meerely fabulous (these are his very words).
If he had simply said things otherwise then they are, it had been no great reprehension; for
what we have not seen we receive from others and upon trust; and I see him sometime,
wittingly and in good earnest, report one and same story diversly; as the judgements of
three best captaines that ever were, spoken by Hanibal, is otherwise in Flaminius his life,
and otherwise in Pyrrhus. But to taxe him to have taken incredible and impossible things
for ready payment is to accuse the most judicious author of the world of want of
judgement. And see here his example: As, says he, when he reports that a child of
Lacedemon suffered all his belly and gutts to be torn out by a cubbe or young foxe,
which he had stolne and kept close under his garment, rather then he would discover his
theft. First, I find this example ill chosen; forasmuch as it is hard to limit the powers of
the soules faculties, whereas of corporall forces, we have more law to limite and know
them; and therefore had I been to write of such a subject, I would rather have made
choyce of an example of this second kind. And some there be less credible. As amongst
others that which he reported of Pyrrhus, who being sore wounded, gave so great a blow
with a sword unto one of his enemies, armed at all assayes and with all pieces, as he cleft
him from the crowns of the head down to the groine, so that the body fell in two pieces.
In which example I find no great wonder, nor do I admit of his excuse wherewith he
cloaketh Plutarke: to have added this word (as it is said) to forewarn us and restraine our

beliefe. For if it be not in things received by authority and reverence of antiquity or
religion, neither would himself have received nor proposed to us to beli eve things in
themselves incredible: and that (as it is said) he does not here sette down this phrase to
that purpose, may easily be perceived by what himself in other places telleth us upon the
subject of the Lacedemonian childrens patience, of examples happened in his time much
harder to be persuaded: as that which Cicero has also witnessed before him, because (as
he says) he had been there himself: that even in their times there were children found
prepared to endure all manner of patience, whereof they made trial before Dianas altar,
and which suffered themselves to be whipped till the blood trilled down all parts of their
body, not only without crying, but also without sobbing; and some who voluntarily
suffered themselves to be scourged to death. And what Plutarke also reporteth, and a
hundred other witnesses averre, that assisting at a sacrifice, a burning coale happened to
fall into the sleeve of a Lacedemonian child, as he was busie at incensing, suffered his
arm to burne so long until the smel of his burnt flesh came to all the by standers. There
was nothing, according to their custom, so much called their reputation in question, and
for which they endured more blame and shame, than to be surprised stealing. I am so well
instructed of those mens greatnes of courage, that this report does not only seem
incredible to me as to Bodin, but I do not so much as deem it rare, or suppose it strange.
The Spartane story is full of thousands of much more rare and cruel examples; then
according to this rate, it containeth nothing but miracle. Concerning this point of stealing,
Marcellinus reporteth that whilst he lived there could never be found any kind of
torment that might in any sort compell the Egyptians surprised filching (which was much
used amongst them) to confesse and tell but their names. A Spanish peasant being laide
upon the racke about the complices of the murther of the, Pretor Lucius Piso, in the midst
of his torments cried out his friends should not stir, but with all security assist him, and
that it was not in the power of any grief or pain to wrest one word of confession from
him: and the first day nothing else could possibly be drawn from him. The next morrow,
as he was led towarde the racke to be tormented anew, he by strong violence freed
himself from out his keepers bands, and so furiously ranne with his bead against a wall,
that he burst his braines out, and presently fell down dead. Epicharis having glutted and
wearied the moody cruelty of Neroes satellites or officers, and stoutly endured their fire,
their beatings, and their engines a whole day long without any one voice or word of
revealing her conspiracy, and the next day after, being again brought to the torture with
her limbs bruised and broken, convayed the lace or string of her gowne over one of the
pillars of the chair wherein she sate, with a sliding knot in it, into which sodainly thrusting
her head she strangled herself with the weight of her body. Having the courage to dye
so, and steale from the first torments, seems she not purposely to have lent her life to the
trial of her patience of the precedent day only to mocke that tyrant and encourage others to
attempt the like enterprise against him? And he that shall enquire of our argolettiers or
freebooters what experiences they have had in these our late civil wars, shall no doubt find
effects and examples of patience, of obstinacy and stif-necknednes in these our miserable
dayes, and amidst the effeminate and puling wordlings far beyond the Egyptians, and well
worthie to be compared to those alreadie reported of Spartan virtue. I know there have

been found seely hoores who have rather endure to have their feet broild upon a gridyron,
their finger ends crusht and wrung with the locke of a pistoll, their eyes all bloody to be
thrust out of their heads with wringing and wresting of a cord about their foreheads,
before they would so much as be ransomed. I have seen and spoken with one who had
been left all naked in a ditch for dead, his necke all bruised and swolne, with a halter
about it, wherewith he had been dragged a whole night at a horses tail through thick and
thin, with a hundred thrusts in his body given him with daggers, not to kill him outright,
but to grieve and terrifie him, and who had patiently endured all that, and lost both speech
and sense, fully resolved (as himself told me) rather to die a thousand deaths (as verily, if
you apprehend what he suffered, he past more than one full death) then promise any
ransome; yet was he one of the wealthiest husbandman in all his country. How many have
been seen who have patiently endured to be burnt and roasted for unknown and wilful
opinions which they had borrowed of others; my self have known a hundred and a
hundred women (for the saying is, Gaskoine heads have some prerogative in that) whom
you might sooner have made to bite a red-hot piece of iron than recant an opinion they had
conceived in anger. They will be exasperated and grow more fell against blowes and
compulsion, and he who first invented the tale of that woman which by no threats or
stripes would leave to call her husband pricke-lowse, and being cast into a pond and duckt
under water, lifted up her hands and joyning her two thumb-nails in act to kill lice above
her head, seemed to call him lousie still, devised a fable whereof in truth we dayly see the
expres image in diverse womens obstinacy and wilfulnesse. And yet obstinacy is the sister
of constancy, at least in vigor and stedfastnesse.
A man must not judge that which is possible and that which is not according to that
which is credible and incredible to our sense and understanding, as I have already said
elsewhere. And it is a great fault, wherein the greater number of men do dayly fall (I
speak not this of Bodin) to make a difficulty in believing that of others which themselves
neither can nor would do. Every man perswades himself that the chief form of
humane nature is in himself; according to her must all others be directed. The
proceedings that have no reference to hers are false and feigned. Is any thing proposed unto
him of another mans faculties or actions? The first thing he calls to the judgement of his
consultation is his own examples; according as it goeth in him, so goeth the worlds order.
Oh dangerous sottishnesse and intollerable foppery! I consider some men a far-off,
beyond and above my self, namely amongst those ancient ones: and although I
manifestly acknowledge my own insufficiency to follow or come near them by a
thousand paces, I cease not to keep them still in view, and to judge of those wardes and
springs that raise them so high the seedes whereof I somewhat perceive in my self as
likewise I do of the mindes extreme basenes which amazeth me nothing at all, and I
misbelieve no more. I see the turn those give to wind up themselves, and I admire their
greatness, and those starts which I perceive to be so wondrous fair, I embrace them: and
if with my strength I reach not unto them, at least my judgement does most willingly apply
itself unto them. The other example he alledgeth of things incredible by Plutarke, is that
reported by Plutarke, that Agesilaus was fined by the Ephories because he had drawne the
he arts and good wills of all his fellow-citizens unto himself alone. I know not what

marke of falsehood or show of impossibility he findes in it; but so it is that Plutarke speaks
there of things which in all likelyhood were better known to him then to us: and as it was
not strange in Greece, to see men punished and exiled only because they were too
popular and pleased the common people over much. Witness the Ostracisme amongst the
Athenians, and the Petalisme amongst the Siracusans. There is an other accusation in the
same place which for Plutarkes sake does somewhat touch me, where he says that he has
very well and in good truth sorted the Romanes with the Romanes, and the Græcians
amongst themselves, but not the Romanes with the Greacians, witness (says he)
Demosthenes and Cicero, Cato and Aristides, Sylla and Lysander, Marcellus and
Pelopidas, Pompey and Agesilaus, deeming thereby that he has favoured the Græcians by
giving them so unequall companions. It is a just reproving of that which is most excellent
and commendable in Plutarke: for in his comparisons (which is the most admirable part of
his work, and wherein in mine opinion he so much pleased himself) the faithfulnesse
and sinceritie of his judgement equalleth their depth and weight. He is a Philosopher that
teacheth us virtue. But let us see whether we can warrant him from this reproch of
prevarication and falsehood. That which I imagine has given occasion or ground to this
judgement is that great and far- spreading lustre of the Roman names, which still are
tingling in our ears and never out of our mindes. We do not think Demosthenes may
equall the glory of a consull, a proconsul and a questor, of this great commonwealth of
Rome. But he that shall impartially consider the truth of the matter, and men in
themselves, which Plutarke did cheiefly aime at, and more, to balance their custom, their
natural dispositions and their sufficiencie, then their for tune: I am of a cleane opposite
opinion to Bodin, and think that Cicero and old Cato are much behind or short of their
parallels. For this purpose I would rather have chosen the example of yong Cato compared
to Pbocion: for in that pair might well be found a more likely disparitie for the Romanes
advantage. As for Marcellus, Sylla, and Pompey, I see very well how their exploits of
war be more swolne, glorious and pompous then the Græcians, whom Plutarke
compareth unto them; but the most vertuous and fairest actions, no more in war then
elsewhere, are not alwaies the most famous. I often see the names of some captaines
smothered under the brightnesse of other names of lesser desert, witness Labienus,
Ventidius, Telesinus, and diverse others. And to take him in that sense, were I to complain
for the Græcians, might not I say that Camillus is much less comparable unto
Themistocles, the Gracchi to Agis and Cleomenes, and Numa to Lycurgus? But it is folly
at one glance to judge of things with so many and diverse faces. When Plutarke compares
them, he does not for all that equall them. Who could more eloquently and with more
conscience note their differences? Does he compare the victories, the exploites of arms,
the power of the armies conducted by Pompey and his triumphs unto those of Agesilaus? I
do not believe (says he) that Xenophon himself (were he living) though it were granted
him to write his pleasure of Agesilaus durst ever dare to admit any comparison betweene
them: seems he to equall Lysander to Sylla? There is no comparison (says he) neither in
number of victories nor hazard of battle betweene them: for Lysander only obtained two
sea-battles, &amp;c. This is no derogation from the Romanes. If he have but simply presented
them unto the Græcians, what ever disparity may be between them, he has not in any sort

wronged them. And Plutarke does not directly counterpoise them. In some there is none
preferred before others; he compareth the parts and the circumstances one after another,
and severally judgeth of them. If therefore any would go about to convince him of
favor, he should narrowly sift out some particular judgement; or in general and plaine
termes say, he has missed in sorting such a Græcian to such a Roman, forasmuch as
there are other more sortable and correspondent, and might better be compared, as having
more reference one unto another.



Return to

: Book II
CHAPTER XXXIII: THE HISTORIE OF SPURINA






CHAPTER XXXIII: THE HISTORIE OF SPURINA
HILOSOPHY thinketh she has not il employed her means, having
yielded the sovereign rule of our mind, and the authority to restraine
our appetites, unto reason. Amongst which, those who judge there is
none more violent than those which love begetteth, have this for their
opinion, that they holde both of body and soul; and man is wholly
possessed with them: so that health itself depended of them, and
physick is sometimes constrained to serve them instead of a Pandership. But contrariwise,
a man might also say that the comixture of the body does bring abatement and weaknesse
unto them; because such desires are subject to satiety and capable of materiall remedies.
Many who have endevored to free and exempt their mindes from the continuall alarumes
which this appetite did assail them with, have used incisions, indeed cut-off the mooving,
turbulent and unruly parts. Others have alayed the force and fervency of them by frequent
applications of cold things, as snow and vinegar. The hair-cloths which our forefathers
used to weare for this purpose, whereof some made shirts, and some waste-bands or
girdles, to torment their reines. A prince told me not long since, that being very yong and

waiting in the Court of King Francis the First, upon a solemn festival day, when all the
Court endevored to be in their best clothes, a humor possessed him to put on a shirt of
hair-cloth, which he yet keepoth, and had been his fathers: but what devotion soever
possessed him, he could not possibly endure until night to put it off again, and was sick
a long time after, protesting he thought no youthly heat could be so violent but the use of
this receipt would coole and allay; of which he perhaps never assayed the strongest? For,
experience sheweth us, that such emotion does often maintaine itself under base, rude,
and slovenly cloathes: and hair cloathes do not ever make those poore that weare them.
Zenocrates proceeded more rigorously; for his Disciples, to make trial of his continencie,
having convayed that beauteous and famous curtizan Lais naked into his bed, saving the
weapons of her beauty, wanton allurements, and amorous or love-procuring potions,
feeling that, mugre all, philosophicall discourses and strict rules, his skittish body beganne
to mutiny, he caused those members to be burned which had listened to that rebellion.
Whereas the passions that are in the mind, as ambition, covetousnesse and others, trouble
reason much more: for it can have no ayde but from its own means; nor are those
appetites capable of satiety but rather sharpened by enjoying and augmented by
possession. The example alone of Julius Cæsar may suffice to show us the disparitie of
these appetites, for never was man more given to amorous delights. The curious and exact
care he had of his body is an authentic witness of it, forasmuch as he used the most
lascivious means that then were in use; as to have the haires of his body smeered and
perfumed al over with an extreme and labored curiosity; being of himself a goodly
personage, white, of a tall and comely stature, of a cheerful and seemely countenance,
his face ful and round and his eyes browne lively, if at least Suetonius may be believed; for
the statues which nowadaies are to be seen of him in Rome answere not altogether this
portraiture we speak of. Besides his wives, which he changed foure times, without
reckoning the bies or amours in his youth with Nicomedes King of Bythinia, he had the
maiden-head of that so farr and highly-renowned Queene of Egypt, Cleopatra; witness
yong Cæsarion whom he begotte of her. He also made love unto Eunoe, Queene of
Mauritania, and at Rome to Posthumia, wife unto ServiusSulpitius: to Lolio, wife to
Gabinius; to Tertulla, of Crassus; indeed unto Mutia, wife to great Pompey, which, as
historians say, was the cause her Husband was divorced from her. Which thing Plutarke
confesseth not to have known. And the Curions both father and son, twitted Pompey in
the teeth, at what time he took Cæsars daughter to wife, that he made himself son in
law to one who had made him cuckold, and himself was wont to call Egyptus. Besides all
this number, he entertained Servilia, the sister of Cato and mother to Marcus Brutus,
whence (as diverse hold) proceedeth that great affection he ever bare to Marcus Brutus; for
his mother bare him at such a time as it was not unlikely he might be borne of him. Thus
(as me seems) have I good reason to deem him a man extreamly addicted to all
amorous licenciousnesse, and of a wanton-lascivious complexion. But the other passion of
ambition, wherewith he was infinitely affected and much tainted, when he came once to
withstand the same it made him presently to give ground. And touching this point, when I
call Mahomet to remembrance (I meane him that subdued Constantinople, and who
brought the final extermination of the name of Græcians) I know not where these two

passions are more equal ballanced, equally an indefatigable letcher and a never-tired
souldier; but when in his life they seem to strive and concurre one with another, the
mutinous heate does ever gourmandize the amorous flame. And the latter, although out of
natural season did never attain to a ful and absolute authority, but when he perceived
himself to be so aged that he was utterly unable longer to undergoe the burden of war.
That which is aleadged, as an example on the contrary side, of Ladislaus, King of Naples,
as very well worth the noting, who, though he were an excellent, courageous and ambitious
captaine, proposed unto himself, as the principal scope of his ambition, the execution of
his sensuality, and enjoying of some rare and unmatched beauty. So was his death: having
by a continuall tedious siege brought the city of Florence to so narrow a pinch that the
inhabitants were ready to yield him the victory, he yielded the same to them upon
condition they would deliver into his hands a wench of excellent beauty that was in the
city, of whom he had heard great commendations, which they were enforced to graunt
him, and so by a private injury to ward off the public ruine of the city. She was daughter
of a notable rare phisician and while he lived chief of his profession who seeing
himself engaged in so stuprous a necessitie, resolved upon an haughty enterprise. Whilst
all were busie adorning his daughter, and besetting her with costly jewels, that she might
the more delight and please this new kingly lover, he also gave her an exquisitively-
wrought and sweetly-perfuimed handkercher, to use in their first approches and
embracements, a thing commonly in use amongst the women of that country. This
handkercher, strongly empoysonped according to the cunning Skill of his art, coming to
wipe both their enflamed secret parts and open pores, did so readily convay and disperse
its poyson, that having sodainly changed the heate into colde, they immediately deceased
one in anothers arms. But I will now return to Cæsar. His pleasures could never make
him lose one minute of an hour, nor turn one step from the occasions that might in any
way further his advancement. This passion did so sovereignly oversway all others, and
possessed his mind with so uncontrouled an authority, that she carryed him whither she
list. Truely I am grieved when in other things I consider this mans greatness, and the
wondrous parts that were in him; so great sufficiencie in all manner of knowledge and
learning, as there is almost no science wherein he has not written. He was so good an
orator, that diverse have preferred his eloquence before Ciceroes; and himself (in mine
opinion) in that facultie thought himself nothing short of him. And his two Anti-Catoes
were especially written to over-balance the eloquence which Cicero had emploied in his
Cato. And for all other matters, was ever mind so vigilant, so active, and so patient of
labor as his? And doubtlesse it was also embellished with sundry rare seedes of virtue - I
meane lively, natural, and not counterfeits. He was exceeding sober, and so homely in his
feeding, that Oppius reporteth how upon a time, through a certain cookes negligence, his
meate being dressed with a kind of medicinable oyle instead of olive-oyle, and so brought
to the boorde, although he found it, yet he fed hartily of it only because he would not
shame his hoste: another time he caused his baker to be whipped because he had served
him with other than common household bread. Cato himself was wont to say of him, that
he was the first sober man had addrest himself to the ruine of his country. And whereas
the same Cato called him one day drunkard, it hapned in this manner. Being both together

in the Senate house, where Catelines conspiracie was much spoken of, wherein Cæsar
was greatly suspected to have a hand, a note was by a friend of his brought, and in very
secret sort delivered him, which Cato perceiving, supposing it might be something that the
conspirators advertised him of, instantly summoned him to show it, which Cæsar, to avoid
a greater suspicion, refused not: it was by chance an amorous letter which Servilia, Catoes
sister, wrote to him: Cato having read it, threw it at him, saying, ’Hold it again, you
drunkard.’ I say it was rather a word of disdaine and anger than a n reproch of this vice: as
often we nickname that anger us with the first nicknames of reproaches that come into our
mouth, though meerely impertinent to those with whom we fall out. Considering that the
vice wherewith Cato charged him has neare coherencie unto that wherein he had
surprised Cæsar: for Venus and Bacchus (as the vulgar he says) agree well together; but
with me, Venus is much more blithe and gamesome, being accompanied with sobrietie.
The examples of his mildenes and clemencie towards such as had offended him are
infinite: I meane, besides those he showed during the civill wars, which (as by his own
writing may plainly appeare) he used to blandish and allure his enemies, to make them
fear his future domination and victories the less. But if any shall say those examples are
not of validitie to witnes his genuine and natural affabilitie, we may lawfully answere, that
at least they show us a wonderful confidence and greatnes of courage to have been in
him. It has often befalne him to send whole armies backe again to his enemies after he
had vanquished them, without dayning to binde them so much as with an oath, if not to
favor, at least not to bear arms against him. He has three or foure times taken some of
Pompeyes chief captaines prisoners, and as often set them at liberty again. Pompey
declared all such as would not follow and accompany him in his wars to be his enemies;
and he caused those to be proclaimed as friends who either would not stir at all, or not
effectually arm themselves against him. To such of his captaines as fled from him, to
procure other conditions, he sent them their weapons, their horses, and all other furniture.
The citties he had taken by main force he freed to follow what faction they would, giving
them no other garison then the memory of his clemencie and mildnes. In the day of his
great battail of Pharsalia, he expresly inhibited that, unles they were driven to
unavoydalle extremities no man should lay hands upon any Roman cittizen. In my
judgement these are very hazardous partes, and it is no wonder if, in the civill wars
tumultuous broiles we have now on foote, those that fight for the ancient laws and state
of their country as he did, do not follow and imitate the example. They are extraordinary
means, and which only belongs to Cæsars fortune, and to his admirable foresight,
successfully to direct and happily to conduct them. When I consider the incomparable
greatness and unvaluable worth of his mind, I excuse Victorie in that she could not
well give him over in this most unjust and unnatural cause. But to return to his clemencie
we have diverse genuine and lively examples, even in the time of his al swaying
government, when all things were reduced into his hands, and be needed no longer to
dissemble. Caius Memmius had written certain detracting and railing orations against
him, which he at full and most sharpely had answered, nevertheless he shortly after
helped to make him consul. Caius Calvus, who had composed diverse most injurious
epigrams against him, having employed sundrie of his friendes to be reconciled to him

again, Cæsar descended to write first unto him. And our good Catullus, who under the
name of Mamurra had so rudely and bitterly railed against him, at last coming to excuse
himself, Cæsar that very night made him to suppe at his own table. Having been
advertised how some were overlavish in rayling against him, all he did was but in a
public oration to declare how he was advertised of it. His enemies he feared less than he
hated them. Certain conspiracies and conventicles were made against his life, which
being discovered unto him, he was contented by an edict to publish how he was
thoroughly informed of them, and never prosecuted the authors. Touching the respect he
ever bare unto his friends, Caius Oppius travelling unto him, and falling very sick, having
but one chamber, he resigned the same unto him, and himself was contented to lie all
night abroade and upon the bare ground. Concerning his justice, he caused a servant of his
whom he exceedingly loved, to be executed, forasmuch as he had laine with the wife of a
Roman knight, although no man sued or complained of him. Never was man that showed
more moderation in his victory or more resolution in his adverse fortune. But all these
noble inclinations, rich gifts, worthy qualities, were altered, smothered, and eclipsed by
this furious passion of ambition; by which he suffred himself to be so far misled that it
may be well affirmed she, only, ruled the stern of all his actions. Of a liberall man she
made him a common theefe, that so he might the better supply his profusion and
prodigalitie; and made him utter that vile and most injurious speech, that if the wickedest
and most pernicious men of the world had for his service and furtherance been faithfull
unto him, he would to the utmost of his power have cherished and preferred them as well
as if they had been the honestest: it so besotted and, as it were, made him drunke with so
extreme vanity, that in the presence of his fellow-citizens, he durst vaunt himself to
have made that great and far-spread Roman Commonwealth a shapelesse and bodilesse
name, and pronounce that his sentences or answeres should thenceforward serve as laws;
and sitting to receive the whole body of the Senate coming toward him, and suffer
himself to be adored, and in his presence divine honors to be done him. To conclude,
this only vice (in mine opinion) lost and overthrew in him the fairest natural and richest
ingenuitie that ever was, and has made his memory abominable to all honest mindes,
insomuch as by the ruine of his countrey and subversion of the mightiest state and most
flourishing commonwealth that ever the world shall see, he went about to procure his
glory. A man might contrariwise find diverse examples of greate persons, whom
pleasure has made to forget the conduct of their own affairs, as Marcus Antonius and
others: but where love and ambition should be in one equall balance and with like forces
mate one another, I will never doubt but Cæsar would gain the prize and gole of the
victory. But to come into my path again. It is much, by discourse of reason, to bridle our
appetites, or by violence to force our members to containe themselv es within the bonds of
dutie. But to whippe us, for the interest of our neighbors; not only to shake off this
sweet pleasing passion, which tickleth us with self-lioving pleasure we apprehend and
feel to see ourselves gratefull to others and of all men beloved and sued unto, but also to
hate and scorne those graces which are the cause of it, and to condemne our beauty
because some others will be set on fire with it, I have seen few examples like this.
Spurina, a young gentleman of Thuscanie -

Qualis gemma micat fulvum quæ dividit aurum,
Aut collo decus aut capiti vel quale per artem
Inclusum buxo, aut Ericia terebintho,
Lucet ebur -- Virg. Æn. x. 134.
As when a precious stone clear rayes does spread,
Set in pure golde, adorning necke or head
Or as fair iv’ry shines in boxe enclos’d,
Or workemanly with mountaine gumme dispos’d
- being endowed with so alluringly-excessive and singular beautie that the chastest eyes
could not possibly gainstand or continently resist the sparkling glances thereof, not
contented to leave so great a flame succourlesse or burning fever remedilesse, which he in
all persons and every where enkindled, entered into so furious despite against himself,
and those rich gifts nature had so prodigally conferred upon him (as if they must bear the
blame of others faults that with gashes and skars he wittingly mangled and voluntarily cut
that perfect proportion and absolute feature which nature had so curiously observed in his
unmatched face; whereof, to speak my opinion, such outrages are enemies to my rules. I
rather admire than honor such actions. His intent was commendable and his purpose
consciencious, but in my seeming somewhat wanting of wisdom. What, if his deformitie
or uglinesse was afterward an instrument to induce others to fall into the sinne of
contempt and vice of hatred, or fault of envy for the glory of so rare commendation; or of
slander, interpreting his humor to be a frauncke ambition. Is there any form whence
vice (if so it please) may not wrest an occasion in some manner to exercise itself? It had
been more just, and therewithall more glorious, of so rare gifts of God to have made a
subject of exemplary virtue and orderly methode. Those which sequester themselves from
public offices, and from this infinite number of thornie and so many-faced rules which in
civile life binde a man of exact honesty and exquisite integrities in mine opinion reape a
goodly commoditie, what peculiar sharpe-nesse soever they enjoin themselves. It is a
kind of death to avoide the pain of well doing or trouble of well living. They may have
another prise, but the prise of uneasiness methinks they never had. Nor that in difficulty
there be anything that is amid the waves of the worldly multitude, beyond keeping
himself upright and untainted, answering loyally and truely discharging al members and
severall parts of his charge. It is happily more easy for one in honest sort to neglect and
pass over all the sexe, than duely and wholly to maintaine himself in his wifes company.
And a man may more incuriously fall into povertie then into plenteousnesse; being justly
dispenced. Custome, according to reason, does leade to more sharpnesse than abstinence
has. Moderation is a virtue much more toylesome than sufferance. The chaste and well
living of yong Scipio has a thousand severall fashions; that of Diogenes but one. This
does by so much more exceed all ordinary lives in innocencie and unspottednesse as those
which are most exquisite and accomplished exceed in profit and out-go it in force.




Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXXIV: OBSERVATIONS CONCERNlNG THE MEANES TO WARRE AFTER
THE MANNER OF JULIUS CÆSAR






Æ
CHAPTER XXXIV: OBSERVATIONS CONCERNlNG THE MEANES TO WARRE
AFTER THE MANNER OF JULIUS CÆSAR
T IS reported of diverse chief Generals in war, that they have
particularly affected some peculiar book or other, as Alexander the
Great highly esteemed Homer; Scipio, Africanus, Xenophon; Marcus
Brutus, Polybius; Charles the Fifth, Philip de Comines: and it is lately
averred that in some places, and with some men, Machiavell is much
accompted of: But our late Marshall Strozzi, who had made especiall
choice to love Cæsar, without doubt I think of all other chose best, for truely he ought to
be the breviary of all true soldiers, as being the absolute and perfect chief patterne of
military profession. And God he knowes with what grace and with what decorum he has
embellished this rich subject, with so pure a kind of speech, so pleasing and so absolutely
perfect, that to my taste there are no writings in the world which in this subiect may be
compared to his. I will here register certain particular and rare parts concerning his

manner of war, which yet remaine in my memory. His army beeing somewhat afrighted
upon the report that ranne of the great forces which K. Iuba brought against him, instead
of abating the opinion his soldiers had conceived of it, and to diminish the means or
forces of his enemy, having caused them to be assembled altogether, thereby to assure
and encourage them, he took a cleane contrary course to that which in like cases we are
accustomed to do, for he had them trouble themselves no more to find out the number of
the forces which his enemies brought against him, for himself had already true
knowledge and certain intelligence of them, and told them a number far exceeding both
the truth and report of them: following what Cyrus commandeth in Xenophon. Forasmuch
as the deceit is not of like interest, for a man to find his enemies in effect weaker than he
hoped, then stronger indeed having once conceived an opinion of their weaknesse. He
enured all his soldiers simply to obey, without controling, gain-saying, or speaking of
their captaines desseignes, which he never communicated unto them, but upon the last
point of execution; and was pleased, if by chance they had any inkling of them, so to
deceive them. Presently to change his opinion: and having prefixed a place to quarter in at
night, he has often been seen to march further, and lengthen his journey, namely if the
weather were foul, or if it rained. The Swizzers in the beginning of his wars in Gaule,
having sent toward him to give them free passage through the Roman countries, and he
being resolved by force to empeach them, did notwithstanding show them very good
looks, and took certain dayes respit to give them an answer. During which time he
might have leisure to assemble his army together. These poore people knew not how well
he could husband time: for he often repeated that the skill to embrace occasions in the
nick is the chiefest part of an absolute captaine: and truly the diligence he used in his
exploit is incredible, and the like was never heard of. If he were not over-consciencious in
that under colour of some treatie, parle or accord, to take any advantage of his enemies, he
was as little scrupulous in that he required no other virtue in his soldiers but valor; and
except mutiny and disobedience he punished not greatly other vices. After his victories he
often gave them the reines to all licenciousness, for a while dispencing them from all rules
of military discipline; saying, moreover, his soldiers were so well instructed that though
they were in their gayest clothes, pranked up, muskt and perfumed, they would,
notwithstanding, run furiously to any combate. And in truth he loved to see them richly
armed, and made them weare gilt, graven and silvered armours, that their care to keep
them cleane and bright might make them more fierce and readie to defend themselves.
Speaking to them, he ever called them by the name of fellow soldiers, a name used at this
day by some captaines; which his successor Augustus afterward reformed, esteeming he
had done it for the necessitie of his affairs, and to flatter the hearts of those which
followed him but voluntarily;
-----Rheni mihi Cæsar in undis,
Dux erat, hic socius facinus quos inquinat, æquat. -- Lucan. v. 289.
When Caasar past the Rheine he was my general,
My fellow here; sinne whom it staines makes fellowes-all;

but this custom was over-lowlie for the dignitie of an emperor and chief general of an
army, and he brought up the fashion again to cal them only soldiers. To this curtesie,
Cæsar did, notwithstanding intermixe a great severity to suppresse and keep them humble.
His ninth legion having mutinied near unto Placentia, he presently cassiered the same
with great ignominie unto it, notwithstanding that Pompey were yet on foot and strong;
and would not receive it into favor but with humble petition and entreaties. He did more
appease them by authority and audacitie than by mildness and affabilitie. Where he
speaks of his passage over the river of Rheine, towards Germany, he says that, deeming
it unworthy the honor of the Roman people his army should pass over in shippes, he
caused a bridge to be built, that so it might pass over drie-foot. There he erected that
admirable bridge whereof he so particularly describeth the same: for he never more
willingly dilates himself in describing any of his exploites then where he endevoreth to
represent unto us the subtilitie of his inventions in such kindes of manuall workes. I have
also noted this his book, that he much accompteth of his exhortations he made his
soldiers before any fight, for where he would show to have been either surprised or
urged, he ever alledgeth this, that he had not so much leisure as to make an oration to his
soldiers or army: before that great battle against those of Tournay, Cæser (says he)
having disposed of the rest, ranne sodainely whither fortune carried him, to exhort his
men, and meeting with the tenth legion, he had not leisure to say any thing else unto them
but that they should remember their former wonted virtue, they should nothing be danted,
they should stoutly resist the encounter of their adversaries; and forasmuch as the enemy
was come within an arrow-shot unto him, he gave the signal of the battle; and sodainely
going elsewere to encourage others, he found them already together by the ears: see here
what himself says of it in that place. Verely his tongue has in diverse places much
bestead, and done him notable service, and even whilst he lived his military eloquence
was so highly regarded that many of his army were seen to copie and keep his orations;
by which means diverse volumes were filled with them, and continued many ages after
his death, his speech and particular graces, so that his familiar friends, and namely
Augustus, hearing that rehearsed which had been collected of his, knew by the phrases
and words what was his or not. The first time that with any public charge he issued out of
Rome, he came in eight dayes to the river of Rhone, having ever one or two secretaries
before him, who continually wrote what he endited, and one behinde him that carried his
sword. And surely if one did nothing but run up and down, he could very hardly
attaine to that promptitude wherewith ever being victorious, having left Gaule, and
following Pompey to Brundusium, in eighteene dayes he subdued all Italie; returned from
Brundusium to Rome, and thence went even to the heart of Spain, where he passed many
extreme difficulties in the wars betweene Afranius and Petreius, and at the long siege of
Marseille; from whence he returned into Macedon, overthrew the Roman army at
Pharsalia; thence pursuing Pompey he passed into Egypt, which he subdued; from Egypt
he came into Syria, and into the countrie of Pontus; where he fought with Pharnaces;
thence into Affrica, where he defeated Scipio and Iuba; and thence through Italie he
returned into Spain, where he overthrew Pompeyes children.

Ocior et cæli flammis et tigride fæta,
Ac veluti montis saxum de vertice præceps
Cum ruit avulsum vento, seu turbidus imber
Proluit, aut annis solvit sublapsa vetustas,
Fertur in abruptum magno mons improbus actu,
Exultatque solo, silvas, armenta, virosque, I
nvolvens secum. -- Virg. Æn. xii. 684.
Swifter then breed -yong tiger, or heav’ns flash,
And as from mountaines top a headlong stone,
Rent-off by winds, or by stormes troublous dash
Washt-off, or loos’d by age of years are gone,
Crosse-carried with great force that hill-like masse
Bounds on the earth, and rowles with it in one
Woods, herds, and men, and all that near it was
Speaking of the siege of Avaricum, he says that it was his custom, both day and night,
ever to be near and about such workemen as he had set a work. In all enterprises of
consequence he was ever the first skout-man or surveyer of any place; and his army never
approched place which he had not viewed or survayed himself. And if we may believe
Suetonius, at what time he attempted to pass over into England he was the first man that
sounded the passage. He was wont to say that he esteemed that victory much more which
was conducted by advise and managed by counsell, then by main strength and force. In
the war against Petreius and Afranius, fortune presenting an apparent occasion of
advantage unto him, he says that he refused it, hoping, with a little more time, but with
less hazard, to see the overthrow of his enemy. Where he also plaid a notable part, to
command all his army to swimme over a river without any necessitie.
------ rapuitque ruens in prælia miles,
Quod fugiens timuisset iter, mox uda receptis
Membra fovent armis, gelisque a gurgite cursu
Restituunt artus, -- Lucan. iv. 151.
The Souldier rides that way in hast to fight
Which yet he would have feared in haste of flight
His limbs with water wet and cold before,
With arms he covers, running does restore.
I find him somewhat more warie and considerate in his enterprises then Alexander; for
the latter seems to seek out, and by main force to run into dangers, as an impetuous
or raging torrent, which without heede, discretion, or choise, shockes and checkinates
whate’er it meeteth withall.

Sic tauriformis volvitur Aufidus,
Qui Regna Dauni perfluit Appuli,
Dum sævit, horrendamque cultis
Diluviem meditator agris. -- Hor. Car. iv. Od. xiv. 25.
So Bull-fac’d Aufidas still rowling growes,
Which through Apulias ancient kingdome flowes,
When he does rage in threatning meditation
To bring on fair fields fearefull inundation.
And to say truth, his hap was to be most employed in the spring time and first heate of
his age: whereas Cæsar was well strucken in years when he beganne to follow arms.
Alexander was of a more cholerike, sanguine and violent constitution, while humor he
stirred up with wine, whereof Cæsar was very abstinent. But where occasions of
necessitie were offered, and where the subject required it, there was never man that so
little regarded his person. As for me, me seems I read in diverse of his exploits a
certain resolution rather to lose himself then to abide the brunt or shame to be
overthrowne. In that great battle which he fought against those of Turnay, seeing the
vanguard of his army somewhat enclining to route, even as be was, without shield or
target, he ranne headlong to the front of his enemies; which many other times happened
unto him. Hearing once how his men were besieged, he past disguised through the midst
and thickest of his enemies campe, so to encourage and awe them with his presence.
Having crossed the way to Dyrrhachium, with very few forces, and perceiving the rest of
his army (the conduct whereof he had left unto Antonius, to be somewhat slow in
coming, he undertook all alone to repasse the sea, notwithstanding a violent and raging
tempest; and secretly stole himself away to fetch the rest of his forces: all the havens on
that side, indeed all the sea, being possessed by Pompey. And concerning the enterprises
he underwent with armed hand, there are diverse of them, which in respect of the hazard,
exceed all discourse of military reason: for, with how weake means undertook he to
subdue the kingdom of Egypt, and afterward to front the forces of Scipio and Iuba, which
were tenne parts greater than his? Mee thinkes such men have had a kind of more than
humane confidence of their fortune: and himself was wont to say that haughty enterprises
were to be executed and not consuIted upon. After the battle of Pharsalia, having sent his
army before into Asia and himself with only one ship passing through the strait of
Hellespont, he met on the seas with Lucius Cassius, attended on with ten tall shippes of
war; he was so far from shunning him, that he durst not only stay for him, but with all
haste make toward and summon him to yield himself to his mercy, which he did.
Having undertaken that furious siege of Alesia, wherein were fourescore thousand men of
defense, and all France up in arms, with a resolution to run upon him and raise the
siege, and having an army on foote of one hundred and nine thousand horse, and two
hundred fortie thousand foote; what a foolhardy and outrageous confidence was it in him
that he would never give over his attempt and resolve in two so great difficulties together?

Which he notwithstanding underwent; and after he had obtained so notable a battle of
those which were without, be soone reduced those that were besieged in the town to his
mercy. The very like happened to Lucullus at the siege of Tigranocerta, against King
Tigrane, but with an unlike condition, seeing his enemies demissenesse, with whom
Lucullus was to deale. I will here note two rare and extraordinary events touching the
siege of Alesia; the one, that the French men being all assembled together with a purpose
to meet with Cæsar, having diligently survaied and exactly numbered all their forces,
resolved in their counsell to cutte off a great part of this huge multitude for fear they
might breed a confusion. This example is new, to fear to be over-many; yet if it be well
taken, it is very likely that the body of an army ought to have a well-proportioned
greatness, and ordered to indifferent bounds. Whether it he for the difficulty to feed the
same or to lead it in order and keep it in awe, and we may easily verifle by examples that
these numerous and infinite armies have seldom brought any notable thing to pass:
according to Cyrus his saying in Xenophon. It is not the multitude of men, but the number
of good men, that causeth an advantage: the rest rather breeding confusion and trouble
than helpe or avail. And Bajazeth took the chiefest foundation of his resolution, against
the advice of all his captaines, to join fight with Tamburlane, only because the
innumerable number of men which his enemy brought into the field gave him an assured
hope of rout and confusion. Skanderbeg, a sufficient and most expert judge in such a case,
was wont to say that tenne or twelve thousand trusty and resolute fighting men ought to
suffice any sufficient chieftaine of war to warrant his reputation in any kind of military
exploite. The other point, which seems to be repugnant both unto custom and reason of
war, is, that Vercingentorix, who was appointed chief general of all the forces of the
revolted Gaules, undertook to immure and shutte himself into, Alesia. For he that has
the commandement of a whole countrie ought never to engage himself, except in cases of
extremities and where all his rest and last refuge goeth on it, and has no other hope left
him but the defense of such a place. Otherwise he ought to keep himself free, that so he
may have means to provide in all parts of his government. But to return to Cæsar: he
became in time somewhat more slow, heedy, and considerate, as witnesseth his familiar
friend Oppius; deeming he should not so easily hazard the honor of so many victories,
which one only disaster or misencounter might make him lose. It is that the Italians are
wont to say, when they will or blame or reproach any man with this overdaring or rash
foolhardinesse, which is often seen in yong men, calling them bisognosi d’onore, as
much to say as needy of honor: and that being yet hungrie r greedy, and voyd of
reputation, they have reason to seek after it, whatsoever it may cost them; which they
should never do that have already acquired the same. There may be some just moderation
in this desire of glory, and some satietie in this appetite as well as in others; diverse do so
practize it. He was far from that religion of the ancient Romans who in their wars
would never prevaile but with meere and genuine virtue: but rather joined more
conscience unto it than nowadaies we should do; and would never allow of all means
were he never so certain to get the victory. In his wars against Ariovistus, while he
was in parly with him, some tumult or insurrection happened between the two armies,
which beganne by the fault or negligence of some of Ariovistus horsmen. In which hurlie-

burlie Cæsar found himself to have a great advantage over his enemies, which
notwithstanding he would not embrace, for fear he might be taxed or suspected to have
proceeded falsly or consented to any trechery. At what time soever he went to fight, he
was accustomed to weare a very rich garment, and of a sheene and garish colour, that so
he might the better be marked. When his soldiers were neerest unto their enemies he
restrained and kept them very short. When the ancient Græcians would accuse or taxe any
man of extreme insufficiencies they used this common proverbe, that he could neither
read nor swimme: and himself was of t his opinion, that the arte of swimming was most
necessary and beneficiarie in war: and a souldier might reape diverse commodities by it, if
he were in haste, and to make speed, he would ordinarily swimme over al the rivers he
met withal; and loved greatly to travell on foote, as Alexander the great was wont. In
Egypt, being on a time forced (to save himself) to leap into a little wherry or bote, and so
many of his people following him that he was in danger to sink, he rather chose to fling
himsel f into the sea, which he did; and swimming came into his fleete, that was more than
two hundred paces from him, holding his writing tables in his left hand out of the water,
and with his teeth drawing his coate of arms after him, that his enemies might not enjoy
it: and this did he being well stricken in years. No general of war had ever so much
credit with his soldiers. In the beginning of his civill wars, his centeniers offered him
every one at their own charges to pay and find him a man at arms, and his footemen to
serve him for nothing, and those that were best able, to defray the poore and needy. Our
late admirall of France, Lord Chastillon, in our late civill wars showed such an
example: for the Frenchmen of his army, at their proper cost and charges, helped to pay
such strangers as followed him. Few examples of so loving and earnest affection may be
found amongst those that follow the old manner of war, and strictly hold themselves
under the ancient pollicie of their laws. Passion has more sway over us then reason: yet
has it chanced in the war against Hannibal, that, imitating the example of the Roman
peoples liberalitie in the citie, the soldiers and captaines refused their pay, and in
Marcellus his campe, those were called mercenary that took any pay. Having had some
defeate near unto Dyrrachium, his soldiers came voluntarily before him, and offered
themselves to be punished; so that he was more troubled to comfort then to chide them.
One only of his cohortes (whereof ten went to a legion) held fight above foure howres
with foure of Pompeys whole legions, until it was well-nigh all defeated with the
multitude and force of arrows: and in his trenches were afterward found one hundred and
thirty thousand shafts. A souldier of his, named Scæva, who commanded one of the
entrances, did so invincibly defend and keep himself, that he had one of his eyes thrust
out, and one shoulder and one thigh thrust through, and his shield flawed and pearced in
two hundred and thirty severall places. It has befallen to many of his soldiers, being,
taken prisoners, to chuse rather to die then promise to follow any other faction, or receive
any other entertainment. Granius Petronius, taken by Scipio in Affrike, after Scipio had
caused all his fellowes to be put to death, sent him word that gave him his life,
forasmuch as he was a man of rank and a questor: Petronius answered that Cæsars
soldiers were wont to give life to others, and not accept it themselves; and therewithall
with his own hands killed himself. Infinite examples there are of their fidelitie. That part

which they, acted who were besieged in Salona, a citie which took part with Cæsar
against Pompey, must not be forgotten, by reason of a rare accident that there hapned.
Marcus Octavius, having long time beleagred the town, they within were reduced to such
extreamitie and pinching necessitie of all things, that to supply the great want they had of
men, most of them being alreadie or hurt or dead; they had set all their slaves at liberty,
and for the beboofe of their engines were compelled to cut off all their womens haires, to
make ropes with them; besides a wonderful lacke of victualls, resolving notwithstanding
never to yield themselves: after they had a long time lingered the siege, and that Octavius
was thereby become more carelesse, and less heeding or attentive to his enterprise, they
one day about high noone (having first ranged their wives and children upon the walles, to
set the better face upon the matter) rushed out in such a fury upon the besiegers, that
having put to rout and defeated the first, the second, and third corps de garde, then the
fourth and the rest, and having forced them to quit their trenches, chased them even to
their shippes: and Octavius with much adoe saved himself in Dyrrachium, where Pompey
was. I remember not at this time to have read of any other example where the beleagred
do in grosse beate the beleagrers, and get the maistry and possession of the field nor that
a sallie has drawne a meere and absolute victory of a battle into consequence.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXXV: OF THREE GOOD WOMEN.






CHAPTER XXXV: OF THREE GOOD WOMEN.
HEY are not to be had by dozens, as each one knowes, namely, in
rights and duties of mariage; for it is a bargaine full of so many thornie
circumstances, that it is hard the will of a woman should long keep her
self whole and perfect therein. And although men have somewhat a
better condition in the same, yet have they much to do. The
touchstone and perfect trial of a goode marriage respects the time that
the societie continueth; whether it have constantly been mild, loyall
and commodious. In our age they more commonly reserve to enstall their good offices,
and set forth the vehemence of their affections toward their lost husbands: and then seek
they at least to yield some testimony of their good wil. O late testimony and out of
season, whereby they rather show they never love them but when they are dead! Our life is
full of combustion and scolding, but our disease is full of love and of curtesie. As fathers
conceal affection toward their children, so they, to maintaine an honest respect, cloake
tbeir love toward their husbands. This mystery answereth not my taste. They may long
enough scratch and dishevel themselves; let me enquire of a chamber-maide or of a
secretarie how they were, how they did, and how they have lived together. I can never
forget this good saying: Jactantius mærent, quæ minus dolent: ’They keep a howling with

most ostentation who are less sorrowfull at heart.’ Their lowring and puling is hateful to
the living and vain to the dead. We shall easily dispence with them to laugh at us when
we are dead, upon condition they smile upon us while we live. Is not this the way to
revive a man with spite; that he who has spitten in my face when I was living shall come
and claw my feet when I am dead? If there be any honor for a woman to weepe for her
husband, it belongs to her that has smiled upon him when she had him. Such as have wept
when they lived, let them laugh when they are dead, as well outwardly as inwardly.
Moreover, regard not those blubbred eyes, nor that pity moving voice, but view that
demeanour, that colour and cheerful good plight of those cheekes under their great
vailes ; thence it is she speaks plaine French. There are few whose health does not daily
grow better and better; a quality that cannot lie. This ceremonious countenance looketh
not so much backward as forward: it is rather a purchase than a payment. In mine infancie
an honest and most fair ladie (who yet liveth) the widdowe of a prince, had somewhat
more of I wot not what in her attires then the laws of widdowhood would well permit. To
such as blamed her for it, it is (said she) I intend no more new acquaintances, and have
no mind at all to marry again. Because I will not altogether dissent from our custom, I
have here made choice of three women who have also employed the, utmost endeavor of
their goodnes and affection about their husbands deaths. Yet are they examples somewhat
different and so urging that they hardly draw life into consequence. Plinie the yonger had
dwelling near to a house of his in Italie a neighbour wonderfully tormented with certain
ulcers which much troubled him in his secret parts. His wife perceiving him to droope and
languish away, entreated him she might leasurely search, and neerely view the quality of
his disease, and she would more freely then any other tell him what he was to hope for:
which having obtained and curiously considered the same, she found it impossible ever to
be cured, and all he might expect was but to lead a long, dolorous, and languishing life:
and therefore, for his more safetie and sovereign remedie, persuaded him to kill
himself. And finding him somewhat nice and backeward to effect so rude an enterprise:
’Thinke not my dear friend (quoth she) but that the sorrowes and grief I see you feel,
touch me as near and more, if more may be, as your self, and that to be rid of them I will
applie the same remedie to my self which I prescribe to you. I will accompany you in
your cure as I have done in your sickness: remoove all fear, and assure your self we shall
have pleasure in this passage, which shall deliver us from all torments, for we will happily
go together.’ That said, and having cheared up her husbands courage, she determined they
should both headlong throw themselves into the sea from out a window of their house that
overlooked the same: and to maintaine this loyall, vehement and never to be severed
affection to the end, wherewith she had during his life embraced him, she would also
have him die in her arms: and fearing they might faile her, and through the fall or fear or
apprehension her bold-fast might be loosed, she caused herself to be fast bound unto
him by the middle: and thus for the ease of her husbands life she was contented to foregoe
her own. She was but of meane place and low fortune, and amidde such condition of
people it is not so strange to see some parts of rare virtue and exemplar goodnesse.
------ extrema per illos

Justitia excedens terris vestigia fecit. Virg. Georg. ii. 473.
Justice departing from the earth did take
Of them her leave, through them last passage make.
The other two are noble and rich; where examples of virtue are rarely lodged. Arria,
wife unto Cecinna Pætus, a man that had been consul, was mother of another Arria, wife
to Thrasea Pætus, whose virtue was so highly renowned during the time of Nero; and by
meane of his son-in-law, grandmother to Fannia. For the resemblance of these mens
and womens names and fortunes has made diverse to mistake them. ’This first Arria, her
husband Cecinna Pætus having been taken Prisoner by the soldiers of Claudius the
Emperor, after the overthrow of Scribonianus, whose faction he had followed, entreated
those who led him prisoner to Rome, to take her into their ship where for the service of her
husband she should be of less charge and incommoditie to them then a number of other
persons which they must necessarily have, and that she alone might supply and stead him
in his chamber, in his kitchen and all other offices; which they utterly refused, and so
hoisted sailes, but she leaping into a fishers boate that she immediately hired, followed
him aloofe from the further shore of Sclavonia. Being come to Rome one day in the
Emperours presence, Junia, the widdow of Scribonianus, by reason of the neerenesse and
societie of their fortunes, familiarly accosted her, but she rudely, with these words, thrust
her away. What (quoth she ) shall I speak to you, or shall I listen what you sayest?
’Thou, in whose lappe Scribonianus your husband was slain’ and you yet livest? and you
breathest? These words with diverse other signes made her kinsfolk and friends perceive
that she purposed to make herself away, as impatient to abide ber husbands fortune. And
Thrasea her son in law, taking hold of her speeches, beseeching her that she would not so
unheedily spoile herself, he thus bespake her: ’What, if I were in Cecinnæs f ortune or
the like, would you have my wife your daughter to do so?’ ’What else? Make’ you a
question of it?’ answered she. ’Yes, marry would I had she lived so long and in so good-
agreeing sort with you as I have done with my husband.’ These and such like answers
encreased the care they had of her and made them more heedful to watch and neerely to
look unto her. One day after she had uttered these words to her keepers, ’You may looke
long enough to me, well may you make me die worse, but you shall never be able to keep
me from dying:’ and therewith furiously flinging herself out of a chaire (wherein she sate)
with all the strength she had, she fiercely ranne her head against the next wall; with which
blow having sore hurt herself, and falling into a dead swowne, after they had with much
adoe brought her to herself again: ’Did I not tell you (quoth she) that if you kept me
from an easy death I would choose another how hard and difficult soever?’ The end of so
admirable a virtue was this. Her husband Pætus wanting the courage to do himself to
death, unto which the Emperors cruelty reserved him, one day, having first employed
discourses and exhortations befitting the counsell she gave him to make himself away,
she took a dagger that her husband wore, and holding it right out in her hand for the
period of her exhortation: Doe thus, Pætus (said she) and at that instant stabbing herself
mortally to the heart, and presently pulling the dagger out again, she reached the same

unto her husband and so yielded up the ghost, uttering this noble, generous, and immortal
speech, Pæte non dolet, she had not the leisure to pronounce other than these three
wordes, in substance materiall and worthy herself, ’Holde Pætus it has done me no hurt.’
Casta suo gladium cum traderet Arria Pæto,
Ouem de visceribus traxerat ipsa suis;
Si qua fides, vulnus quod feci, non dolet, inquit.
Sed q uod tu facies, id mihi Pæte dolet. -- Mart. i. Epig. xiv. 1.
Chast Arria, when she gave her Pætus that sharpe sword,
Which from her bowells she had drawne forth bleeding new,
The wound I gave and have, if you will trust my word
Grieves not, said she, but that which shall be made by you.
It is much more lively in his own natural and of a richer sense, for both her husbands
wound and death, and her own hurts, she was so far from grieving to have been the
counselor and motive of them, that she rejoiced to have performed so haughty and
courageous an act, only for the behoofe of her dear husband; and at the last gasps of her
life she only regarded him, and to remove all fear from him to follow her in death, which
Pætus beholding, he immediately wounded himself with the same dagger, ashamed, as I
suppose, to have had need of so dear an instruction and precious a teaching. Pompea
Paulina, an high and noble borne yong Roman ladie, had wedded Seneca, being very
aged. Nero, his fair disciple, having sent his satellites or officers toward him to denounce
the decree of his death to him, which in those dayes was done after this manner: when the
Roman Emperors had condemned any man of quality to death, they were wont to send
their officers unto him to chuse what death he pleased, and to take it within such and such
a time, which, according to the temper of their choler, they prescribed unto him sometimes
shorter and sometimes longer, giving him that time to dispose of his affairs, which also
by reason of some short warning they diverse times took from him: and if the condemned
partie seemed in any sort to strive against their will, they would often send men of purpose
to execute him, either cutting the veins of his arms and legs, or compelling him to take
and swallow poison. But men of Honour stayed not that enforcement, but to that effect
used their own Phisit ans or Surgeons, Seneca, with a reposed and undanted countenance,
listned attentively to their charge, and presently demaunded for paper and inke to make his
last wil and testament, which the captaine refusing him, he turned towards his friends and
thus bespoke them: ’Sith, my loving friends, I cannot bequeath you any other thing in
remembrance or acknowledgement of what I owe you, I leave you at least the richest and
best portion I have, that is, the image of my maners and my life, which I beseech you to
keep in memory; which doing you may acquire the glory and purchase the name of truly
sincere and absolutely true friends.’ And therewithall, sometimes appeasing the sharpenes
of the sorow he saw them endure for his sake, with mild and gentle speeches, sometimes
raising his voice to chide them. ’Where are,’ said he ’those memorable precepts of
Philosophy? What is become of those provisions which for so many years together we

have laid up against the brunts and accidents of Fortune? Was Neroes innated cruelty
unknown unto us? What might we expect or hope for at his hands, who had murdred his
mother and massacred his brother, but that he would also do his tutor and governor that
has fostred and brought him up? Having uttered these words to all the bystanders, he
turned him to his wife, as she was ready to sink down, and with the burden of her grief to
faint in heart and strength; he called and embraced her about the necke, and heartil y
entreated her, for the love of him, somewhat more patiently to bear this accident; and that
his hour was come, wherein be must show no longer by discourse and disputation, but in
earnest effect, declare the fruit he had reaped by his studie; and that undoubtedly he
embraced deathe, not only without grief but with exceeding joy. Wherefore; my dear
dear heart, do not dishonour it by your tears, lest you seem to love yourself more than
my reputation. Asswage your sorrowes and comfort your self, in the knowledge you hast
had of me and of my actions, leading the rest of your life by the honest occupations to
which you are addicted. To whom Paulina, having somewhat rouzed her drooping spirits,
and by a thrice noble affection awakened the magnanimity of her high-setled courage,
answered thus : ’No, Seneca, think not that in this necessitie I will leave you without my
company. I would not have you imagine that the vertuous examples of your life have not
also taught me to die; and when sha ll I be able to do it or better, or more honestly, or
more to my own liking then with your self? And be resolved I wil go with you and be
partaker of your fortune.’ Seneca taking so generous a resolve and glorious a
determination of his wife in good part, and to free himself from the fear he had to leave
her after his death to his enemies mercy and cruelty: ’Oh my dear Paulina, I had,’ quoth
be, ’persuaded you what I thought was convenient, to leade your life more happily, and
doest you then rather choose the honor of a glorious death? Assuredly I will not envy
you. Be the constancy and resolution answerable to our common end, but be the beautie
and glory greater on your side.’ That said, the veines of both their arms were cut, to the end
they might bleede to death; but because Senecæs were somewhat shrunken up through age
and abstinence, and his blood could have no speedy course, he commanded the veines of
his thighes to be launced; and fearing lest the torments he felt might in some sort entender
his wifes heart, as also to deliver himself from the affliction which greatly yearned him
to see her in so pittious plight, after he had most lovingly taken leave of her, he besought
her to be pleased she might be carried into the next chamber, which was accordingly
performed. But all those incisions being unable to make him die, he willed Statius Anneus
his phisitian to give him some poysoned potion which wrought but small effect in him for
through the weaknesse and coldenesse of his members, it could not come unto his heart.
And therefore they caused a warme has to be prepared, wherein they layd him, then
perceiving his end to approach, so long as he had breath he continued his excellent
discourses concerning the subject of the estate wherein he found himself, which his
secretaries, so long as they could hear his voice, collected very diligently, whose last
words continued long time after in high esteem and honor amongst the better sort of men,
as oracles; but they were afterward lost, and great pittie it is they never came unto our
handes. But when he once beganne to feel the last pangs of death, taking some of the
water wherein he lay bathing, all bloody, he therewith washed his head, saying, ’I vow this

water unto Jupiter the Deliverer.’ Nero being advertised of all this, fearing lest Paulinæs
death (who was one of the best alied ladies in Rome, and to whom he bare no particular
grudge) might cause him some reproach, sent in all poste baste to have her incisions
closed up again, and if possible it could be, to save her life, which her servants by
unwrithing her, performed, she being more than halfe dead and voyd of any sense. And
that afterward, contrary to her intent, she lived, it was very honorable and as befitted her
virtue, shewing by the pale hew and wanne colour of her face how much of her life she
had wasted by her incisions. See here three true stories, which in my conceit are as
pleasant and as tragical as any we devise at our pleasures to please the vulgar sort withall;
and I wonder that those who invent so many fabulous tales do not rather make choise of
infinite, excellent and quaint stories that are found in bookes, wherein they should have
less trouble to write them, and might doubtlesse proove more pleasing to the hearer and
profitable to the reader. And whosoever would undertake to frame a compleate and well-
joynted, body of them neede neither employe nor adde any thing of his own unto it
except the ligaments, as the soldring of another mettall, and by this means might compact
sundry events of all kindes, disposing and diversifying them according as the beauty and
lustre of the work should require; and very near, as Ovid has showen and contrived his
Metamorphosis, with that strange number of diverse fables. In the last couple this is also
worthy consideration, that Paulina offreth willingly to leave her life for her husband’s
sake, and that her husband had also other times quit death for the love of her. There is no
great counterpoyze in this exchange for us, but according to his Stoike humor I suppose
he persuaded himself to have done as much for her, prolonging his life for her avail as if
he had died for her. In one of his letters he writeth to Lucilius, after he had given him to
understand how an ague having surprised him in Rome, contrary to his wives opinion who
would needs have stayed him, he sodainly took his coach to go unto a house of his into
the country; and how he told her that the ague he had was no bodily fever, but of the
place; and followeth thus: ’At last she let me go, earnestly recommending my health unto
me. Now I who know how her life lodgeth in mine, begin to provide for myself, that
consequently I may provide for her the priviledge my age has bestowed on me making me
more constant and more resolute in many things, I lose it whenever I call to mind that in
this aged corps there harboureth a young woman to whom I bring some profit. Since I
cannot induce her to love me more courageously, she induceth me to love my self more
carefully; for something must be lent to honest affections, and sometimes, although
occasions urge us to the contrary, life must be revoked again, indeed with torment. The
soul must be held fast with ones teeth, since the lawe to live [in honest men] is not to live
as long as they please, but so long as they ought. He who esteemeth not his wife or a
friend so much as that he will not lengthen his life for them, and wil obstinately die, that
man is over- nice and too effeminate: The soul must commaund that unto herself, when
the utilitie of our friends requireth it we must sometimes lend ourselves unto our friend,
and when we would die for us we ought for their sakes to interrupt our deseigne. It is a
testimony of high courage to return to life for the respect of others , as diverse notable
men have done; and to preserve age is a part of singular integritie (the cheifest
commoditie whereof is the carelesnesse of her continuance, and a more courageous and

disdainful use of life) if a man perceive such an office to be pleasing, acceptable and
profitable to any well-affected friend. And who doeth it receiveth thereby a grateful meede
and pleasing recompence; for what can be sweeter than to be so dear unto his wife, that
in respect of her a man become more dear unt o himself. So my Paulina, has not only
charged me with her fear, but also with mine. It has not been sufficient for me to
consider how resolutely I might die, but I have also considered how irresolutely she might
endure it, I have enforced my self to live. And to live is sometime magnanimity.’ Reade
here his own wordes, as excellent as is his use.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXXVI: OF THE WORTHIEST AND MOST EXCELLENT MEN






CHAPTER XXXVI: OF THE WORTHIEST AND MOST EXCELLENT MEN
If a man should demaund of me, which of all men that ever came to
my knowledge I would make choise of, me seems I find three who
have been excellent above all others. The one is Homer: not that
Aristotle or Varro (for example sake) were not perhaps as wise
and as sufficient as he: nor that Virgil (and possibly in his own arte) be
not comparable unto him. I leave that to their judgements that know
them both. I who know but one of then, according to my skill may only say this, that I
cannot be persuaded the Muses themselves did ever go beyond the Roman.
Tale facit carmen docta testudine, quale
---Cynthius impositis temperat articulis, -- PROPERT. 1. ii. Eleg. xxxiv.
79.
He on his learned lute such verse does play
As Phoebus should thereto his fingers lay.

In which judgement this must notwitlistdnding not be forgotten, that Virgil does
especially derive his sufficiency from Homer, and he is his guide and schoolemaster, and
that but only glance or sentence of the Iliads has given both body and matter to that great
and divine poem of the Æneid. My meaning is not to account so: I entermix diverse other
circumstances which yield this man most admirable unto me, and as it were beyond
humane condition. And truely I am often amazed that he who has produced, and by his
authority brought so many deities in credit with the world, has’ not obtained to be reputed
a god himself. Being blind and indigent, having lived before ever the sciences were
redacted into strict rules and certain observations, he had so perfect knowledge of them,
that all those which since his time have labored to establish pollicies or commonwealths,
to manage wars, and to write either of religion or philosophy, in which sect soever or of
all artes, have made use of him as of an absolutely perfect master in the knowledge of all
things; and of his books, as of a seminary, a spring-garden or store-house of all kinds of
sufficiency and learning.
Qui quid sit pulchchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non,
Plenius ac melius, Chrysippo, ac Crantore dicit. -- HOR. 1. i. Epist. xxiii.
What is fair, what is foul, what profit may, what not,
Better than Crantor or Chrysippus, Homer wrot.
And as another says:
------a quo ceu fonte perrenni
Vatum Pieriis labra rigantur aquis. -- OVID. Am. 1. iii. Eleg. viii. 25.
By whom, as by an ever-flowing-filling spring,
With Muses liquor poets lippes are bath’de to sing.
And another:
Adde Heliconiadum comites, quoram unus Homerus,
Astra potitus -- LUCR. 1. iii. 1081.
Muses companions adde to these, of all
One only Homer has in heav’n his stall.
And another:
------ cujusque ex ore profuso

Omnis posteritas latices in carmina duxit,
Amnemque in tenues, ausa est deducere rivos:
Unius faacunda bonis. -- MANIL. Ast. 1. ii. 8.
From whose large mouth for verse all that since live
Drew water, and grew bolder to derive
Into thinne shallow rivers his deepe flood
Richly luxuriant in one man’s good.
It is against nature’s course that he bath made the most excelent production that may be:
for the ordinary birth of things is imperfect: they are augmented by encrease and
corroborated by growth. He has reduced the infancy of poesie and diverse other sciences
to be ripe, perfect, and compleate. By which reason he may be termed the first and last of
poets, following the noble testimony antiquity has left us of him, that having had no man
before him whom he might imitate, so bath he had none after him could imitate him. His
wordes (according to Aristotle) are the only words that have motion and action: they are
the only substantiall wordes. Alexander the Great, having lighted upon a rich casket
amongst Darius his spoils, appoynted the same to be safely kept for himself to keep his
Homer in, saying he was the best adviser and faithfullest counselor he had in his military
affairs. By the same reason said Cliomenes, son to Anaxandridas, that he was the
Lacedemonians poet, for he was an excellent good teacher or master of warrelike
discipline. This singular praise and particular commendation has also been given him by
Plutarke, where he says that he is the only author in the world who yet never distasted
reader, or glutted man, ever showing himself other and different to the readers, and ever
flourishing with a new grace. That wagge Alcibiades, demanding one of Homers bookes
of one who professed letters, because he had it not, gave him a whirrit on the eare, as if a
man should find one of our Priests without a breviarie. Xenophanes one day made his
moan to Hieron, the tyrant of Siracusa, that he was so poore as he had not wherewithall
to find two servants. How commeth that to pass? (answered Hieron). Homer, who was
much poorer than you are, dead as he is, findeth more than tenne thousand. What left
Panætius unsaide when he named Plato the Homer of Philosophers? Besides, what glory
may be compared to his? There is nothing liveth so in mens mouthes as his name and his
workes; nothing so known and received as Troy, as Helen and her wars, which
perhaps never were. Our children are yet called by the names he invented three
thousand years since and more. Who knows not Hector? Who has not heard of
Achilles? Not only some particular races, but most nations, seek to derive themselves
from his inventions. Machomet, the second of that name, Emperor of Turkes, writing to
Pope Pius the second: I wonder (says he) how the Italians will bandie against me, seeing
we have our common offspring, from the Troians; and I as well as they have an interest to
revenge the blood of Hector upon the Græcians whom they favor against me. Is it not a
worthy comedie, whereof kings, commonwealths, principalities, and emperours have for
many ages together played their parts, and to which this great universe serveth as a
theatre? Seven cities of Greece strived amongst themselves about the places of his birth,

so much honor his very obscuritie procured him.
Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenæ. A. GEL.
Noct. Att. 1. iii. c. 11.
Rhodes, Salamis, Colophon, Chios, Argos, Smyrna, with Athens.
The other is Alexander the great. For who shall consider his age, wherein he beganne
his enterprises; the small means he had to ground so glorious a design upon, the
authority he attained unto in his infancie amongst the greatest commanders and most
experienced captaines in the world, by whom he was followed: the extraordinary favor
wherwith fortune embraced him and seconded so many of his haughty-dangerous
exploites, which I may in a manner call rash or foolhardie.
Impellens quicquid sibi summa petenti
Obstaret, gaudensque viam fecisse ruinæ. -- LUCAN 1. i. 148 .
While he shot at the high’st, all that might stay
He for’st and joyde with ruine to make way.
That eminent greatness to have at the age of thirty years, passed victoriously through
all the habitable earth and but with half the life of a man to have attained the utmost
endeavour of human nature so that you cannot imagine his continuance lawfull, and the
lasting of his increase in fortune, and progres in virtue even unto a just terme of age, but
you must suppose something above man to have caused so many royal branches to issue
from out the loines of his soldiers, leaving the world after his death to be shared between
foure successors, only captaines of his army, whose successors have so long time since
continued, and descendants maintained that large possession. So infinite, rare, and
excellent vertues that were in him, as justice, temperance, liberalitie, integritie in words,
love toward his, and humanitie toward the conquered. For in truth his maners seem to
admit he no just cause of reproach: indeed some of his particular, rare, and extraordinary
actions may in some sort be taxed. For it is impossible to conduct so great and direct so
violent motion with the strict rules of justice. Such men ought to be judged in gross by the
mistris end of their actions. The ruine of Thebes; the murder of Menander, and of
Ephestions Physitian; the massacre of so many Persian prisoners at once; of a troupe of
Indian soldiers, not without some prejudice unto his word and promise; and of the
Cosæians and their little children, are escapes somewhat hard to be excused. For
concerning Clitus, the fault was expiated beyond its merit; and that action, as much as any
other, witnesseth the integritie and cheerfulness of his complexion, and that it was a
complexion in itself exceedingly formed to goodnesse. And it was wittily said of one
that he had vertues by nature and vices by accident. Concerning the point that he was
somewhat too lavish a boaster, and over-impatient to hear himself ill spoken of; and

touching those mangers, arms and bits, which he caused to be scattered in India,
respecting his age and the prosperitie of his fortune, they are in my conceit pardonable in
him. He that shall also consider his many vertues, as diligence, f oresight, patience,
discipline, policy, magnanimity, resolution and good fortune, wherein though Haniballs
authority had not taught it us, he has been the first and chief of men: the rare beauties,
matchlesse features, and incomparable conditions of his person, beyond all comparison
and wonder breeding; his carriage, demeanor, and venerable behaviour, in a face so
young, so vermeill, and heart enflaming:
Oualis ubi Occam perfusus Lucifer unda,
Quem Venus ante alios astror um diligit ignes,
Extulit os sacrum cælo, tenebrasque resolvit. -- VIRG. Æn. 1. viii. 589.
As when the day-starre washt in ocean streames,
Which Venus most of all the starres esteemes,
Showes sacred light, shakes darkenesse off with beames.
The excellencie of his wit, knowledge and capacity; the continuance and greatness of
his glory unspotted, untainted, pure and free from all blame or envie: insomuch as long
after his death it was religiously beleeved of many that the medalls or brooches
representing his person brought good lucke unto such as wore or had them about them.
And that more Kings and Princes have written his gests and actions then any other
historians of what a quality soever, have registered the gests or collected the actions of
any other King or Prince that ever was: and that even at this day the Mahometists, who
contemne all other histories, by special priviledge allow, receive, and only honor his.
All which premises duely considered together, he shall confesses I have had good reason
to prefer him before Cæsar himself, who alone might have made me doubt of my
choice. And it must needs be granted that in his exploites there was more of his own,
but more of fortunes in Alexander’s achievements. They have both had many things
mutually likewise, and Cæsar happily some greater. They were two quick and devouring
fires, or two swift and surrounding streames, able to ravage the world by sundry ways.
Et velut immissi diversis partibus ignes
Arentem in silvam, et virgulta sonantia lauro:
Aut ubi decursu rapido de montibus altis
Dant sonitum spumosi amnes, et in æquora currunt,
Quisque suum populatus iter. -- VIRG. Æn. 1. xii. 521.
As when on diverse sides fire is applied
To cracking bay-shrubs, or to woods sunne dried
Or as when flaming streames from mountaines hie,
With down-fall swift resound, and to sea flie

Each one does havocke-out his way thereby.
But grant Cæsar’s ambition were more moderate, it is so unhappy in that it met, with
this vile subject of the subversion of his countrie, and universall empairing of the world;
that all parts impartially collected and put together in the balance, I must necessarily bend
to Alexander’s side. The third, and in my judgement most excellent man, is Epaminondas.
Of glory he has not so much as some, and is far shorte of diverse (which well
considered is no substantiall part of the thing) in resolution and true valor, not of that
which is set on by ambition, but of that which wisdom and reason may settle in a well-
disposed mind, he had as much as maybe imagined or wished for. He has in mine
opinion made as great trial of his vertues as ever did Alexander or Cæsar, for although his
exploites of war be not so frequent and so high raised, yet being throughly considered,
they are as weightie, as resolute, as constant, indeed as authentic a testimony of
hardnes and military sufficiencie as any man’s else. The Greacians, without any
contradiction, affoorded him the honor to entitle him the chief and first man among
themselves: and to be the first and chief man of Greece is without all question to be
chief and first man of the world. Touching his knowledge and worth, this ancient
judgement does yet remaine amongst us, that never was man who knew so much, nor
never man that spake less than he. For he was by sect a Pythagorean, and what he spake
no man ever spake better. An excellent and most perswasive orator was he. And
concerning his maners and conscience therein be far outwent all that ever medled with
managing affairs: for in this one part, which ought especially to be noted, and which
alone declareth that we are, and which only I counterpoise to al others together, he gives
place to no philosopher; no not to Socrates himself. In him innocencie is a qualities
proper, chief, constant, uniform, and incorruptible; in comparison of which, it seems
in Alexander subalternall, uncertaine, variable, effeminate and accidentall. Antiquitie
judged that precisely to sift out, and curiously to prie into all other famous captaines, there
is in every one severally some speciall quality which makes him renowned and famous. In
this man alone it is a virtue and sufficiencie, every where compleate and likewise, which in
all offices of humane life leaveth nothing more to be wished for. Be it in public or
private, in peaceable negociations or warlike occupations, be it to live or die, greatly or
gloriously, I know no form or fortune of man that I admire or regard with so much
honor, with so much love. True it is, I find this obstinacy in povertie somewhat
scrupulous, and so have his best friends portrayed it. And this only action (high
notwithstanding and very worthy admiration) I find or deem somewhat sharpen so as I
would not wish nor desire the imitation thereof in me, according to the form it was in
him. Scipio Æmilianus alone (wold any charge him with as fierie and nobly-minded an
end, and with as deepe and universall knowledge of sciences) might be placed in the other
scale of the balance against him. Oh what a displeasure has swift-gliding Time done me,
even in the nick, to deprive our eyes of the chiefest pair of lives, directly the noblest that
ever were in Plutarke, of these two truly worthy personages: by the universall consent of
the world, the one chief of Græcians, the other principal of Romanes. What a matter,
what a workeman! For a man that was no saint, but as we say a gallant-honest man, of

civil maners and common customs, of a temperate haughtinesse, the richest life I know
(as the vulgar saying is) to have lived amongst the living, and fraughted with the richest
qualities and most to be desired parts (all things impartially considered) in my humor, is
that of Alcibiades. But touching Epaminondas, for a patterne of excessive goodness I will
here insert certain of his opinions. The sweetest contentment he had in all his life he
witnesseth to have been the pleasure he gave his father and mother of his victory upon
Leuctra: he staketh much in preferring their pleasure before his content, so just and full of
so glorious an action. He thought it unlawfull, indeed were it to recover the liberty of his
countrey, for any one to kill a man except he knew a just cause. And therefore was he so
backeward in the enterprise of Pelopidas his companion, for the deliverance of Thebes. He
was also of opinion that in a battle a man should avoid to encounter his friend, being on
the contrary part, and if he met him to spare him. And his humanitie or gentleness even
towards his very enemies, having made him to be suspected of the Boeotians, forasmuch
as after he had miraculously forced the Lacedemonians to open him a passage, which at
the entrance of Morea, near Corinth, they had undertaken to make good, he was
contented, without further pursuing them in fury, to have marched over their bellies, was
the cause he was deposed of his office of Captain General. Most honorable for such a
cause, and for the shame it was to them, soone after to be forced by necessitie to advance
him to his first place, and to acknowledge how their glory, and confesse that their safetie,
did only depend on him: victory following him as his shadow whither soever he went,
and as the prosperitie of his countrie was borne by and with him, so it died with and by
him.



Return to

: Book II.
CHAPTER XXXVII: OF THE RESEMBLANCE BETWEENE CHILDREN AND FATHERS






CHAPTER XXXVII: OF THE RESEMBLANCE BETWEENE CHILDREN AND FATHERS
HIS hudling up of so much trash, or packing of so many severall
pieces, is done so strangely, as I never lay hands on it but when an over
lazie idlenesse urgeth me, and nowhere but in my own house. So has
it been compact at sundry pauses, and contrived at severall intervalls,
as occasions have sometime for many months together, here and there
in other places detained me. Besides, I never correct my first
imaginations by the second, it may happen I now and then alter some
word rather to diversifie then take any thing away. My purpose is to represent the progress
of my humors, that every part be seen or member distinguished as it was produced. I
would to God I had begunne sooner, and knew the tracks of my changes and course of my
variations. A boy whom I employed to write for me supposed he had gotten a rich bootie
when he stole some parts which he best liked; but one thing comforts me, that he shall
gain no more than I lost by them. I am grown elder by seven or eight years since I
beganne them; nor has it been with-out some new purchase. I have by the liberality of
years acquainted my self with the stone-chollike. Their commerce and long conversation

is not easily past over without some such-like fruite. I would be glad that of many other
presents they have ever in store, to bestow upon such as waite upon them long, they had
made choice of some one that had been more acceptable unto me: for they could never
possess me with any that, even from my infancy, I hated more. Of all accidents incident to
age it was that I feared most. My self have many times thought I went on too far, and
that to hold out so long a journey, I must of necessitie in the end stumble upon some such
unpleasing chance. I perceived plainly and protested sufficiently it was high time to
depart, and that according to the rule of skilfull chirurgions, who when they must cut off
some members life must be seared to the quick and cut to the sound flesh. That nature is
wont to make him pay untolerable usurie who does not yield or pay the same in due time.
I was so far from being readie to make lawfull tender of it, that in eighteene months, or
thereabouts, I have continued in so yrkesome and unpleasing plight, I have already learn’d
to apply my self unto it; and am now entring into covenant with this chollicall kind of
life; for therein I find matter wherewith to comfort me, and to hope better. So much are
men enured in their miserable estate, that no condition is so poore but they will accept: so
they may continue in the same. Heare Mæcenas -
Debilem facito manu,
Debilem pede, coxa.
Lubricos quate dentes,
Vita dum superego, bene est. -- SEN. Epist. ci.
Make me be weake of hand,
Scarce on my legs to stand,
Shake my loose teeth with pain,
’Tis well so life remaine.
And Tamburlane cloked the fantastic cruelty he exercised upon Lazars or
Leprousmen with a foolish kind of humanitie, putting all he could find or hear of to
death, (as he said) to ridde them from so painefull and miserable a life as they lived. For
there was none so wretched amongst them that would not rather have been three times a
leper than not to be at all. And Antisthenes the Stoic being very sicke, and crying out,
’Oh, who shall deliver me from my tormenting evils?’ Diogenes, who was come to visite
him, foorthwith presenting him a knife: ’Mary, this,’ said he, ’and that very speedily, if
you please’: ’I mean not of my life,’ replied be, ’but of my sickness.’ The sufferances
which simply touch us in mind do much less afflict me then most men: partly by
judgement; for the world deemeth diverse things horible, or avoydable with the loss of
life, to me are in a manner indifferent: partly by a stupid and insensible complexion, I
have in accidents that hit me not point-blancke: which complexion I esteeme one of the
better partes of my natural condition. But the truely-essentiall and corporall sufferances,
those I taste very sensibly: yet is it, having other times fore-apprehended them with a
delicate and weake sight, and by the enjoying of this long health and happy rest, which
God has lent me the better part of my age, somewhat impaired; I had by imagination

conceived them so intolerable that, in good truth, I was more afraide than since I have
found hurt in them: whereupon I dayly augment this opinion: that most of our soules
faculties (as we employ them) do more trouble than stead the quiet repose of life. I am
continually grapling with the worst of all diseases, the most grievous, the most mortal, the
most remedilesse and the most violent. I have alreadie had trial of five or six long and
painefull fittes of it. Nevertheless, either I flatter-my self, or in this plight there is yet
something that would faine keep life and soul together, namely, in him whose mind is
free from fear of death, and from the threats, conclusions and consequences which
physicke is ever buzzing into our heads. But the effect of pain itself has not so sharpe
a smarting, or so pricking a sharpenesse, that a setled man should enter into rage or fall
into despaire. This commoditie at least I have by the chollicke, that what I could never
bring to pass in my self, which was altogether to reconcile and thoroughly to acquaint
my self with death, she shall atchieve, she shall accomplish, for by how much more
she shall importune and urge me, by so much less shall death be fearefull unto me. I
had already gotten, not to be beholding to life, but only in regard of life, and for lives
sake: she shall also untie this intelligence and loose this combination. And God graunt, if
in the end her sharpenesse shall happen to surmount my strength, she cast me not into
other extremities no less vicious, no less bad, that is, to love and desire to die.
Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes. -- MART. 1. x. Epig. xlvii. ult.
Nor fear your latest doom,
Nor wish it ere it come.
They are two passions to be feared, but one has her remedy nearer than the other.
Otherwi se I have ever, found that precept ceremonious which so precisely appoints a man
to set a good countenance, a setled resolution, and disdainful carriage, upon the
sufferance of evills. Why does Philosophy, which only respecteth livelinesse and
regardeth effects, ammuze itself about these externall apparances? Let her leave this care
to Mimikes, to Histrions, and to Rhetoricke Masters, who make so great accompt of our
gestures. Let her hardly remit this vocall lithernesse unto evil, if it be neither cordiall nor
stomacall. And let her lend her voluntary plaints to the kind of sighes, sobs, palpitations,
and palenesse which nature has exempted from our puissance. Alwayes provided, the
courage be without fear, and words sans despair: let her be so contented. ’What matter is
it if we bend our arms, so we writhe not our thoughts?’ She frame thus for ourselves, not
for others: to be, not to seem. Let her applie herself to governe our understanding,
which she has undertaken to instruct. Let her in the pangs or fits of the chollike, still
maintains the soul capable to acknowledge herself and follow her accustomed course,
resisting sorrow and enduring grief, and not shamefully to prostrate herself at his feet:
mooved and chafed with the combate, not basely suppressed nor faintly overthrowne:
capable of entertainement and other occupations unto a certain limit. In so extreme
accidents it is cruelty to require so composed a warde at our hands. If we have a good
game it skills not, though we have an ill countenance. If the body be any whit eased by

complaining, let him do it: if stirring or agitation please him, let him turn, rowle, and
tosse himself as long as he list: if with raising his voice, or sending it forth with more
violence, he think his grief any thing alayed or vented (as some physicians affirme it
somewhat easeth women great with child, and is a meane of easy or speedy delivery)
fear he not to do it; or if he may but entertaine his torment, let him mainly cry out. Let us
not commaund our voice to depart; but if she will, let us not hinder it, Epicurus does not
only pardon his wise-man to crie out, when he is grieved or vexed, but perswadeth him to
it. Pugiles etiam quum feriunt, in jactandis cæstibus ingemiscunt, quia profundenda voce
omne corpus intenditur venitque plaga vehementior: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. ii.) ’Men when they
fight with sand-bags, or such he avy weapons, in fetching their blow and driving it, will
give a groan withall because by stretching their voice all their body is also strayned, and
the stroke cometh with more vehemence.’ We are vexed and troubled enough with the
evil, without troubling and vexing ourselves with these superfluous rules. This I say to
excuse those which are ordinarily seen to rage in the fits, and storme in the assaults of
this sicknesse, for, as for me, I have hitherto past it over with somewhat a better
countenance, and am content to groan without braying and exclaiming. And yet I trouble
not myself to maintaine this exterior decencie; for I make small reckoning of such an
advantage, in that I lend my sicknesse what it requireth: but either my pain is not so
excessive, or I bear it with more constancy than the vulgar sorte. Indeede I must
confesse, when the sharpe fits or throwes assaile me, I complain and vexe my self, but
yet I never fall into despaire, as that fellow:
Eiulatu, questu, gemitu, fremitibus
Resonando multum flebiles voces refert. -- Cic. ibid.
With howling, growning and complaint of fates,
Most lamentable cries he imitates.
I feel my self in the greatest heate of my sicknesse and I ever found my self capable
and in tune, to speak, to think, and to answer, as soundly as at any other time, but not so
constantly, because my pain does much trouble and distract me. When I am thought to
be at the lowest, and that such as are about me spare me, I often make a trial of my
forces, and propose them such discourses as are furthest from my state. There is nothing
impossible for me; and me thinkes I can do all things upon a sodaine fitte, so it continue
not long. Oh, why have not I the gift of that dreamer mentioned by Cicero, who dreaming
that he was closely embracing a yong wench, found himself ridde of the stone in his
sheetes! Mine do strangely dis-wench me. In the intermission or respites of this
outragious pain, when as my ureters (through which the urine passeth from the reines to
the bladder) languish without gnawing me, I sodainely return into my ordinary form;
forasmuch as my mind taketh no other allarume but the sensible and corporall. All which I
certainely owe unto the care I have had to prepare my self by reason and discourse of
such accidents:

----- laborum
Nulla mihi nov a nunc facies inopinaque surgit,
Omnia præcepi, atque animo mecum ante peregi. --VIRG. Æn. 1. vi. 103.
No new or unexpected form is cast,
Of travels in my breast: all I forecast,
In my mind with my self I all forepast.
I am handled somewhat roughly for a prentise, and with a violent and rude change;
being at one instant falne from a very pleasing, calme, and most happy condition of life,
unto the most dolorous, yrkesome, and painefull that can possibly be imagined: for,
besides that in itself it is a disease greatly to be feared, its beginnings or approaches are
in me sharper or more difficult than it is wont to trouble others withall. The pangs and
fittes thereof do so often assaile me, that in a manner I have no more feeling of perfect
health. Notwithstanding I hitherto keep my spirit so seated as, if I can but join
constancy unto it, I find my self to be in a much better state of life than a thousand
others, who have neither ague nor other infirmitie but such as for want of discourse they
give themselves. There is a certain fashion of subtile humility which procedeth of
presumption: as this, that in many things we acknowledge our ignorance, and are so
curteous to avowe that in Natures workes there are some qualities and conditions which to
us are imperceptible, and whereof our sufficiencie cannot discover the means nor find
out the causes. By this honest and conscientious declaration, we hope to gain that we
shall also be beleeved in those we shall say to understand. We neede not go to cull out
miracles, and chuse strange difficulties: me seems, that amongst those things we
ordinarily see there are such incomprehensible rarities as they exceed all difficulty of
miracles. What monster is it that this teare or drop of seed whereof we are ingendred
brings with it, and in it the impressions, not only of the corpor all form, but even of the
very thoughts and inclinations of our fathers? Where does this droppe of water contains or
lodge this infinite number of formes? And how bear they these resemblances of so rash
and unruly a progresse, that the childes child shall be answerable to his grandfather, and
the nephew to his uncle? In the family of the Lepidus the Roman, there have been three,
not successively, but some between, that were borne with one same eye covered with a
cartilage or gristle. There was a race in Thebes which from their mothers wombe bare the
form of a burre, or yron of a launce; and such as had it not were judged as misbegotten
and deemed unlawfull. Aristotle reporteth of a certain nation, with whom all women were
common, where children were allotted their fathers only by their resemblances. It may be
supposed that I am indebted to my father for this stonie-quality, for he died exceedingly
tormented with a great stone in his bladder. He never felt himself troubled with the disease
but at the age of sixtie-seaven years, before which time he had never felt any likelihood
or motion of it, nor in his reines, nor in his sides, nor elsewhere: and until then had lived
in very prosperous health, and little subject to infirmities, and continued seven years and
more with that disease training a very dolorous lives-end. I was borne five and twenty
years before his sickness and during the course of his healthy state, his third child. Where

was al this while the propension or inclination to this defect hatched? And when he was so
far from such a disease, that light part of his substance wherewith he composed me, how
could it for her part bear so great an impression of it? And how so closely covered, that
fortie-five years after, I have begunne to have a feeling of it? and hitherto alone, among
so many brethren and sisters, and all of one mother. He that shal resolve me of this
progresse I will believe him as many other miracles as he shall please to tell me: alwayes
provided (as commonly they do) he go not about to pay me with a doctrine much more
difficult and fantastical then the thing itself (let physicians somewhat excuse my
liberty): for by the same infusion and fatall insinuation, I have received the hate and
contempt of their doctrine. The antipathie which is betweene me and their arte is to me
hereditarie. My father lived three score and fourteene years; my grandfather three score
and nine; my great grandfather very near fourescore, and never tasted or took any kind
of physicke. And whatsoever was not in ordinary use amongst them was deemed a drug.
Physicke is grounded upon experience and examples. So is mine opinion. Is not this a
manifest kind of experience, and very advantageous? I know not whether in all their
registers they are able to find me three more, borne, bred, brought up, and deceased,
under one roofe, in one same chimnie, that by their own direction and regiment have
lived so long. Wherein they must needs grant me, that if it be not reason, at least it is
fortune that is on my side. Whereas among physicians fortune is of more consequence then
reason. Low-brought and weake as I am now, let them not take me at an advantage, nor let
them not threaten me: for that were insulting arrogance. And to say truth, I have by my
familiar examples gained enough upon them, although they take hold and stay there.
Humane things have not so much constancy: it is now two hundred years, wanting but
eighteene, that this essay continueth with us: for the first was borne in the yeare of our
Lord one thousand foure hundred and two, some reason there is why this experience
should now beginne to faile us. Let them not upbraide me with those infirmities which
now have seized upon me: is it not sufficient to have lived seven and fortie years in good
and perfect health for my part? Suppose it to be the end of my ca rriere, yet it is of the
longest. Mine ancestors by some secret instinct and natural inclination have ever loathed
al manner of physicke: for the very sight of drugs bred a kind of horror in my father. The
Lord of Gaviac, mine unckle by the fathers side, a man of the church, sickish even from
his birth, and who notwithstanding made his weake life to hold until sixtie seaven years,
falling once into a dangerous and vehement continuall feaver, it was by the physicians
concluded that unless he would aide himself (for they ofte terme that aide which
indeede is impeachment) he was but a dead man. The good soul, afrighted as he was at
that horrible sentence, answred thus, why then I am a dead man: but shortly after God
made their prognostications to proove vain. The Lord of Bussaguet, last of the brethren
(for they were foure), and by much the last, he alone submitted himself to that arte, as I
imagine by reason of the frequence he had in other sciences; for he was a counsellor in the
Court of Parliament, which prospered so ill with him that though he were in show of a
very strong complexion, he died long before the others, except one, the Lord of Saint
Michæl. It may well be I have received of them that natural dyspathie to physicke. Yet if
there had been no other consideration but this, I would have endevoured to force it. For all

these conditions, which without reason are borne in us, are vicious. It is a kind of maladie
a man mu st fight withall. It may be I had such a propension, but I have settled and
strengthened the same by discourses which in me have confirmed the opinion I have of it.
For I have also the consideration to refuse physicke by reason of the sharpnesse of its
taste. It would not easily agree with my humor, who think health worthy to be
purchased with the price of all cauteries and incisions, how painefull soever. And
following Epicurus, me seems that all manner of voluptuousness should be avoided, if
greater griefes follow them, and griefes to be sought after, that have greater
voluptuousness ensuing them. Health is a very precious jewell, and the only thing that
in pursuite of it deserveth a man should not only employ time, labor, sweate and goods,
but also life to get it; forasmuch as without it life becomes injurious unto us.
Voluptuousnes, science and virtue, without it, tarnish and vanish away. And to the most
constant and exact discourses that philosophy will imprint in our min ds to the contrary,
we neede not oppose any thing against it but the image of Plato, being visited with the
falling sickenesse, or an apoplexie; and in this presupposition chalenge him to call the
richest faculties of his mind to helpe him. All means that may bring us unto health,
cannot be esteemed of men either sharpe or dear. But I have some other apparances
which strangely make me to distrust al his ware. I do not say but there may be some art
of it: it is certain that amongst so m any of Natures workes there are some things proper
for the preservation of our health. I know there are some simples which in operation are
moistening and some drying. My self have found, by experience, that radish rootes are
windie, and senie-leeves breede loosenes in the belly. I have the knowledge of diverse such
experiments, as I know that mutton nourisheth, that wine warmeth me. And Solon was
wont to say that eating was, as all other drugges are, a medicine against the disease of
hunger. I disallow not the use we draw from the world, nor doubt I of natures power and
fruitfulnesse, and other application to our need. I see that the pickrell-fish and the
swallowes live well by her laws. I greatly distrust the inventions of our wit, of our arte
and of our science, in favor of which we have forsaken nature, and abandoned her rules;
wherein we can neither observe limitation nor keep moderation. As we term justice, the
composition of the first laws that came unto our hands, and their practice and
dispensation very often most wicked and inconvenient. And as those which mocke and
condemne it, intend not nevertheless to wrong this noble virtue; but only to condemne
the abuse and profanation of so sacred a title: so likewise in physicke, I know her glorious
name, her proposition, and her promise, so profitable to mankinde: but what it desseigneth
amongst us, I neither honor nor respect. First, experience makes me fear it, for of all I
know, I see no kind of men so soone sicke, nor so late cured, as those who are under the
jurisdiction of physicke: Their very health is distempered and corrupted by the constraint
of their prescriptions. Physitians are not contented to have the government over
sicknesses, but they make health to be sicke, lest a man should at any time escape their
authority. Of a constant and perfect health, do they not frame an argument of some future
daungerous sickenesse? I have often been sicke, and without any their helpe, I have
found my sicknesses (though I never medled with the bitterness of their prescriptions) as
easy to be tollerated and as short as any mans else, and yet I have felt diverse. My health

is free and sound, without any rules or discipline) except of my own custom and
pleasure. I find no difference in places, al are likewise to me to dwell in: for being sicke, I
neede no other commodities then those I must have when I am in health. I am nothing
passionated, though I be without physician, without apothecary, or without physical helpe;
whereat I see some as much troubled in mind as they are with their disease. What, does
the best physician of them all make us perceive any happinesse or continuance in his life,
as may witness some manifest effect of his skill and learning? There is no nation but has
continued many ages without physicke: indeed the first ages, which is as much to say, the
best and most happy: and the tenth part of the world has as yet no use of it. Infinite
nations know it not; where they live both more healthie and much longer than we do: indeed
and amongst us the common sort live happily without it. The Romanes had been sixe
hundred years before ever they received it: by means of interposition of Cato the censor,
they banisht it their citie, who declared how easily man might live without it, having lived
himself foure score and five yeeres, and his wife until she was extreamely old, not
without physicke, but indeed without any physician. For whatsoever is by experience
found healthy for our body and health may be termed physicke. He entertained (as
Plutarke says) his familie in health by the use (as far as I remember) of hares milk: as
the Arcadians (says Plinie) cure all maladies with cowes milke. And the Lybians (says
Herodotus) do generally enjoy a perfect health by observing this custom, which is, so
soone as their children are about foure yeeres old, to cautherize and seare the veines of
their head and temples, whereby they cut off the way to all rumes and defluxions. And the
countrie-people where I dwell use nothing against all diseases but some of the strongest
wine they can get, with store of saffron and spice in it; and all with one like fortune. And
to say true, of all this diversitie of rules and confusion of prescriptions, what other end or
effect workes it but to evacuate the belly? which a thousand home-simples will do as
well. And I know not whether it be as profitable (as they say) and whether our nature
require the residents of her excrements, until a certain measure, as wine does his lees for
his preservation. You see often men very healthy, by some strange accidents, to fall into
violent vomites and fluxies, and voyd great store of excrements, without any precedent
need or succeeding benefite: indeed, with some empairing and prejudice. I learnt of Plato not
long since, that of three motions which belong to us, the last and worst is that of
purgations, and that no man, except he be a foole, ought to undertake it, unless it be in
great extremity. The evil is troubled and stirred up by contrary oppositions. It is the form
of life that gently must diminish, consume and bring it to an end. Since the violent twinges
of the drug and maladie are ever to our loss, since the quarrell is cleared in us, and the
drug a trustlesse helpe; by its own nature an enemy to our health, and but by trouble has
no accesse in our state. Let’s give them leave to go on. That order which provideth for
fleas and moles, does also provide for men, who have the same patience to suffer
themselves to be governed that fleas and moles have. We may fairely cry Bo-bo-boe; it
may well make us hoarse, but will nothing advaunce it. It is a proud and impetuous order.
Our fear and our despaire, in liew of enviting help from it, does distaste and delay it out
of our helpe: it oweth his course to sickness as well as to health. To suffer itself to be
corrupted in favor of one, to the prejudice of the others rights, it will not do it, so should

they fall into disorder. Let us go on in the name of God; let us follow. That order leadeth
on such as follow it: those that follow it not, it haleth on, both with their rage and physicke
together. Cause a purgation to be prepared for your braine; it will be better emploied unto
it then to your stomacke. A Lacedemonian being asked, what had made him live so long
in health, answered, ’The ignorance of physicke.’ And Adrian the Emperor, as he was
dying, ceased not to crie out that the number of physicians had killed him. A bad wrestler
became a physician. ’Courage,’ said Diogenes to him, ’you hast reason to do so, for now
shall you helpe to put them into the ground who have heeretofore ayded to lay you on it.’
But according to Nicocles, they have this happe, that the sunne does manifest their
success, and the earth does cover their fault. And besides, they have a very advantageous
fashion among themselves, to make use of all manner of events; for whatsoever either
Fortune or Nature, or any other strange cause (whereof the number is infinite) produces
in us or good or healthfull, it is the priviledge of physicke to ascribe it unto herself. All
the fortunate successes that come to the patient which is under their government, it is from
nature he has them. The occasions that have cured me, and which heale a thousand others
who never send or call for physicians to helpe them, they usurpe them in their subjects.
And touching ill accidents, either they utterly disavow them, in imputing the blame of
them to the patient, by some vain reasons, whereof they never misse to find a great
number; as he lay with his arms out of the bed, he has heard the noyse of a coach.
------rhedarum transitus arcto
Vicorum inflexu. -- JUV. Sat. iii. 236.
Coaches could hardly pass,
The lane so crooked was.
His window was left open all night: he has laine upon the left side, or troubled his
head with some heavy thought. In some, a word, a dreame, or a looke, is of them deemed
a sufficient excuse to free themselves from all imputation: or if they please, they will also
make use of this emparing, and thereby make up their business, and as a meane which
can never faile them, when by their applications the disease is grown desperate, to pay us
with the assurance that, if their remedies had not been, it would have been much worse.
He whom but from a cold they have brought to a quotidian ague, without them should
have had a continuall feaver. They must needs thrive in their businesses since all ills
redownd to their profit. Truely they have reason to require of the pacient an application of
favourable confidence in them: which must necessarily be in good earnest and yielding to
apply itself unto imaginations, over-hardly to be believed, Plato said very well and to
the purpose, that freely to lie belonged only to physicians, since our health dependeth on
their vanity and falsehood of promises. Æsope, an author of exceeding rare excellence,
and whose graces few discover, is very pleasant in representing this kind of tyrannical
authority unto us, which they usurpe upon poore soules, weakned by sickenes and
overwhelmed through fear: for he reporteth how a sicke man, being demaunded by his
physician what operation he felt by the physicke he had given him: ’I have sweate much,’

answered he. ’That is good,’ replied the physician. Another time he asked him again how
he had done since: ’I have had a great cold and quivered much,’ said he. ’That is very well,’
quoth the physician again. The third time he demaunded of him how he felt himself, he
answered: ’I swell and puffe up as it were with the dropsie.’ ’That’s not amisse,’ said the
physician. A familiar friend of his coming afterward to visite him, and to know how he
did. ’Verily,’ said be, ’my friend, I die with being too too well.’ There was a more equall
law in Egypt by which for the first three dayes the physician took the patient in hand
upon the patients perill and fortune; but the three dayes expired, it was at his own. For,
what reason is there that Æsculapius their patrone must have been strucken with
thunder, forasmuch as he recovered Hippolitus from death to life?
Nam pater omnipotens aliquem indignatus ab umbris,
Mortalem infernis ad lumina surgere vitæ,
Ipse repertorem medicinæ talis, et artis
Fulmine Phoebigenam Stygias detrusit ad undas. -- VIRG. Æn. 1. vii. 770.
Jove, scorning that from shades infernall night,
A mortal man should rise to lifes new light,
Apolloes son to hell he thunder-threw,
Who such an arte found out, such medicine knew,
and his followers must be absolved that send so many soules from life to death? A
physician boasted unto Nicocles that his arte was of exceeding great authority. It is true
(quoth Nicocles) for it may kill so many people without fear of punishment by law. As
for the rest, had I been of their counsell, I would surely have made my discipline more
sacred and mysterious. They had begunne very well, but the end has not answered the
beginning. It was a good ground to have made Gods and Dæmons authors of their science,
to have assumed a peculiar language and writing to themselves. Howbeit, philosophy
supposeth it to be folly to persuade a man to his profit by ways not understood: Ut si
quis medicus imperet vt sumat. ’As if a physician should bid a man take.
Terrigenam, herbigradam, domiportam, sanguine cassam. -- Cic. Divin. ii.
One, earth-borne, go-by-grasse, house-bearing, slimie, blood-less.’
It was a good rule in their arte, and which accompanieth all fanaticall, vain, and
supernaturall artes, that the patients beliefe must by good hope and assurance preoccupate
their effect and operation. Which rule they hold so far forth, that the most ignorant and
bungling horse-leach is fitter for a man that has confidence in him, than the skilfullest
and learnedst physician. The very choyce of most of their drugges is somewhat mysterious
and divine. The left foot of a tortoyze, the stale of a lizard; the dongue of an elephant, the
liver of a mole, blood drawne from under the right wing of a white pigeon, and for us who

are troubled with the stone-cholike (so disdainfully abuse they our misery) some rattes
pounded to small powder, and such other foolish trash, which rather seem to be magike
spells or charmes than effects of any solid science. I omit to speak of the odde number
of their pilles, the destination of certain dayes and feastes of the yeare, the distinction of
hours to gather the simples of their ingredients, and the same rewbarbative and severely-
grave looke of theirs, and of their port and countenance, which Plinie himself mocketh
at. But, as I was about to say they have failed, forasmuch as they have not added this to
their fair beginning, to make their assemblies more religious, and their consultations
more secret. No profane man should have access unto them, no more than to the secret
ceremonies of Æsculapius. By which means it commeth to pass that their irresolution;
the weaknesse of their arguments, divinations and grounds; the sharpenesse of their
contestations, full of hatred, of jealousie and particular considerations, being apparant to
all men; a man must needs be stark blinde if he who falleth into their hands see not
himself greatly endangered. Who ever saw physician use his fellowes receipt without
dimishing or adding somewhat unto it; whereby they greatly betraie their arte and make us
perceive they rather respect their reputation, and consequently their profit, than the well-
fare or interests of their patients. He is the wisest amongst their doctors who has long
since prescribed them that one alone should meddle to cure a sicke man; for, if it prosper
not with him, and he do no good, the reproach will not be great to the arte of physicke
through the fault of one man alone; and on the other side, if it thrive well with him, the
glory shall be the greater; where as if they be many, on every hand will they discredit
their mysterie, because they oftner happen to do ill than well. They should have been
content with the perpetuall disagreeing which is ever found in the opinions of the
principal masters and chief authors of their science, known but by such as are
conversant in bookes, without making apparent show of the controversies, and
inconstancies of their judgement, which they foster and continue amongst themselves.
Will we have an example of the ancient debate of physicke? Herophilus placeth the
originall cause of sickenesse in the humors: Erasistratus, in the blood of the arteries:
Asclepiades, in the invisible atomes that pass into our pores; Alcmeon, in the abundance
or defense of corporall forces: Diocles, in the inequality of the bodies elements, and in the
quality of the aire we breathe: Strabo, in the abundance, cruditie, and corruption of the
nourishment we take: Hipocrates does place it in the spirits. There is a friend of theirs,
whom they know better than I, who to his purpose crieth out that the most important
science in use amongst us (as that which has charge of our health and preservation) is by
il hap the most uncertaine, the most confused, and most agitated with infinite changes.
There is no great danger to mistake the height of the sunne, or missereckon the fraction of
some astronomical suppuration; but herein, whereon our being and chief freehold does
wholly depend, it is no wisdom to abandon ourselves to the mercy of the agitation of so
manifold contrary winds. Before the Peloponnesian war there was no great news of this
science. Hipocrates brought it into credite. Whatsoever he established, Chrisippus
overthrew. Afterward Erasistratus, grande-child to Aristotle, re-enverst what ever
Chrysippus had written of it. After these, start up the Emperikes, who concerning the
managing of this arte, took a new course altogether different from those ancient fathers.

And when their credit began to growe stale, Herophilus brought another kind of physicke
into use, which Asclepiades, when his turn came, impugned, and in the end subverted.
Then came the opinions of Themison to be in great authority, then those of Musa, and
afterward those of Vectius Valens, a famous physician, by reason of the acquaintance he
had with Messalina. During the time of Nero, the soveraigntitie of physick fel to the hands
of Thessalus, who abolished and condemned whatsoever had been held of it before his
time. This mans doctrine was afterward wholly overthrowne by Crinas of Marseilles, who
anew revived and framed that all men should direct and rule medicinable operations to the
Ephemerides and motions of the starres, to eate, to drinke, to sleepe at what hour it
should please Luna and Mercurie. His authority was soone after supplanted by Charinus,
a physician of the same town of Marseilles, who not only impugned ancient physicke,
but also the use of warme and public bathes, which had been accustomed to many ages
before. He caused men to be bathed in cold water; indeed, were it in the deepe of winter he
plunged and dived sicke men into the running streame of rivers. Untill Plinies time no
Roman had ever dained to exercise the arte of physicke, but was ever used by strangers
and Græcians as at this daie it is used in France by Latinizers. For as a famous physician
says, we do not easily admit and allow that physicke, which we understand, nor those
drugs we gather ourselves. If those nations from whom we have the wood guiacum, the
sarsapareille, and the wood esquine, have any physician amongst them, how much think
we by the same commendation of the strangenesse, rarenesse and dearth, they will rejoice
at our coleworts and parsly? For, who dareth contemne things sought and fetcht so far-
off with the hazard of so long and dangerous a peregrination? since these auncient
mutations of physicke, there have been infinite others, that have continued unto our
dayes, and most often entire and universal mutations; as are those which Paracelsus,
Fioravanti and Argenterius have produced: for (as it is told me) they do not only change a
receipt, but also the whole contexture and policy of physickes whole body, accusing such
as hitherto have made profession thereof, of ignorance and cosinage. Now I leave to your
imagination in what plight the poore patient findeth himself. If we could but he assured,
when they mistake themselves, their physicke would do us no harme, although not profit
us, it were a reasonable composition for a man to hazard himself to get some good, so he
endangered not himself to lose by it. Æsope reporteth this story, that one who had sought
a Moore-slave, supposing his blacke hew had come unto him by some strange accident, or
ill usage of his former master, with great diligence caused him to be medicined with
diverse ba thes and sundry potions; it fortuned the Moore did no whit mend or change his
swarthy complexion, but lost his former health. How often commeth it to pass, and how
many times see we physicians charge one another with their patients death. I remember a
popular sickenesse which some years since greatly troubled the townes about me, very
mortal and dangerous the rage whereof being overpast, which had carried away an
infinite number of persons; one of the most famous physicians in all the country published
a book concerning that disease, wherein he adviseth himself that they had done amisse
to use phlebotomy, and confesseth it had been one of the principal causes of so great an
inconvenience. Moreover, their authors hold that there is no kind of physicke, but has
some hurtful part in it. And if those that fit our turn do in some sort harm us, what must

those do which are given us to no purpose, and out of season? As for me, if nothing else
belonged thereunto, I deem it a matter very dangerous, and of great prejudice for him
who loathes the taste or abborres the smell of a potion, to swallow it at so unconvenient
hours, and so much against his heart. And I think it much distempereth a sicke man,
namely, in a season he has so much neede of rest. Besides, consider but the occasions on
which they ordinarily ground the cause of our sickenesses; they are so light and delicate,
as thence I argue that a very small error in compounding of their drugges may occasion as
much detriment. Now if the mistaking in a physician be dangerous, it is very ill for us ; for
it is hard if he fall not often into it. He has needs of many parts, diverse considerations,
and severall circumstances to proportion his design justly. He ought to know the sicke
man’s complexion, his temper, his humors, his inclinations, and his imaginations. He
must be assured of external circumstances; of the nature of the place; the condition of the
aire; the quality of the weather; the situation of the planets, and their influences. In
sickenes, be ought to be acquainted with the causes, with the signes, with the affections
and criticall days; in drugges, he should understand their weight, their virtue, and their
operation, the country, the figure, the age, the dispensation. In all these parts be must
know how to proportion and refer them one unto another, thereby to beget a perfect
symmetric or due proportion of each part; wherein if he misse never so little, or if amongst
so many wheeles and several motions, the least be out of tune or temper, it is enough to
marre all.
God knowes how hard the knowledge of most of these parts is: for example, how shall
he find out the proper signe of the disease, every malady being capable of an infinite
number of signes. How many debates, ad controversies have they amongst themselves
about the interpretations of urine. Otherwise, whence should that continuall altercation
come we see amongst them about the knowledge of the disease? How should we excuse
this fault, wherein they fall so often, to take a martin for a fox? In those diseases I have
had (so they admitted any difficulty) I could never yet find three agreeing in one opinion.
I more willingly note examples that concerne my self. A gentleman in Paris was not long
since cut for the stone by the appointment of physicians, in whose bladder they found no
more stone then in his hand: where also a Bishop, who was my very good friend, had by
his physicians been earnestly solicited to be cut; and my self, because they were of his
counsell, upon their words, aided to persuade him to it; who being deceased and opened,
it was found he had no infirmity but in his reines. They are less excusable in this disease,
for so much as it is in some sort palpable. Whereby I judge the arte of chirurgery much
more certain; for it seeth and handleth what it does, and therein is less conjecture and
divination. Whereas phisitians have no speculum matrices to discover our braine, our
lungs, and our liver unto them. The very promises of physicke are incredible. For being to
provide for diverse and contrary accidents, which often trouble us together, and with a
kind of necessary relation one unto another, as the heate of the liver and the cold of the
stomacke, they will persuade us that with their ingredients this one shall warme the
stomacke, and this other coole the liver; the one has charge to go directly to the reynes,
indeed even to the bladder, without enstalling his operation anywhere else, and by reason of
its secret propriety, keeping his force and virtue all that long way, and so full of stops or

lets until it come to the place to whose service it is destinated. Another shall drie the
braine, and another moisten the lungs. Of all this hotch-pot having composed a mixture or
potion, is it not a kind of raving to hope their several virtues shall divide and separate
themselves from out such a confusion or commixture, to run to so diverse charges? I should
greatly fear they would loose or change their tickets and trouble their quarters. And who
can imagine, that in this liquid confusion these faculties be not corrupted, confounded, and
alter one another? For that the execution of this ordinance depends on another officer, to
whose trust and mercy we must once more commit our lives? As we have doublet and
hose-makers to make our cloths, and are so much the better fitted, inasmuch as each
meddles with his own trade, and such have their occupation more strictly limited then a
tailer that will make all; and as for our necessary foode, some of our great lords, for their
more commodity and ease, have severall cookes, as some only to dresse boiled meates,
and some to roste, others to bake; whereas if one cooke alone would supply all three in
general he could never do it so exactly: In like sort for the curing of all diseases, the
Egyptians had reason to reject this general mysterie of physicians, and to sunder this
profession for every malady, allotting each part of the body his distinct workman. For
every particular part was thereby more properly attended, and less confusedly governed,
and for so much as they regarded but the same especially. Our physicians never remember
that he who will provide for all provideth for nothing; and that the totall and summarie
policy of this little world is unto them undigestible. Whilst they feared to stop the course
of a bloody flux because he should not fal into an ague, they killed a friend of mine who
was more worth then all the rabble of them, indeed, were they as many more. They balance
their divinations of future things with present evils, and because they will not cure the
braine in prejudice of the stomacke, they offend the stomacke and empaire the braine, and
all by their seditious and tumultuary drugs. Concerning the variety and weaknes of the
reasons of this Art, it is more apparent then in any other Art. Aperitive things are good for
a man that’s troubled with the collike, because that opening and dilating the passages, they
addresse this slimy matter whereof the gravel and stone is engendred, and so convay
downeward whatsoever beginneth to harden and petrifie in the reines: aperitive things are
dangerous for a man thats troubled with the collick, because that opening and dilating the
passages, they addresse towards the reines the matter enger idring gravell, which by
reason of the propensions they have with it, easily seizing on the same, must by
consequence stay great store of that which is convaied unto them. Moreover, if by chance
it fortune to meet with a body somewhat more grosse then it ought to be, to pass all those
strait turnings, which to expel the same they must glide through; that body being moved by
those soluble things, and cast in those strait chanels, and coming to stop them, it will
doubtlesse hasten a certain and most dolorous death. They have a like constancy about the
counsels they give us, touching the regiment of our life. It is good to make water often; for
by experience we see that permitting the same idlely to ly still, we give it leisure to
discharge itself of her lees and excrements, which may serve to breed the stone in the
bladder. It is good to make water but seldom, for the weighty dregs it draws with it are
not easily carried away except by violence: as by experience is seen in a torrent that
runneth very swift, which sweepeth and clenseth the place through which he passeth,

much more than does a slow-gliding streame. Likewise it is good to have often copulation
with women, for that openeth the passages, and convaieth the gravell away: it is also
hurtful, for it heateth, wearieth, and weakneth the reines. It is good for one to bathe
himself in warme water, forasmuch as that looseth and moistneth the places where the
gravel and stone lurketh: it is also bad, because this application of externall heat helpeth
the reines to concoct, to harden and petrifie the matter disposed unto it. To such as are at
the bathes, it is more healthful to eat but little at night, that the water they are to drink the
next morning, finding the stomacke empty, and without any obstacle, it may work the
greater operation: on the other side, it is better to eat but a little at dinner, lest a man might
hinder the operation of the water, which is not yet perfect, and not to charge the stomacke
so suddenly, after this other travell, and leave the office of digesting unto the night, which
can better do it then the day; the body and spirit being then in continual motion and action.
See here how they in all their discourses juggle, daily, and trifle at our charge, and are
never able to bring me a proposition, but I can presently frame another to the contrary of
like force and consequence. Let them then no longer rail against those who in any
sicknes suffer themselves gently to be directed by their own appetite, and by the counsell
of nature, and who remit themselves to common fortune. I have by occasion of my travels
seen almost all the famous bathes of Christendome, and some years since have begun to
use them: for in general I deem bathing to be very good and healthy, and I am
persuaded we incur no small incommodities in our health by having neglected and lost
this custom, which in former times were generally observed very near amongst all
nations, and is yet with diverse at this time to wash their bodies every day. And I cannot
imagine but that we are much the worse with keeping our bodies all over-crusted, and our
pores stopt with grease and filth. And touching the drinking of them, fortune has first
made it to agree very well with in taste; secondly, it is natural and simple, and though
vain, nothing dangerous; whereof this infinity of people of al sorts and complexions, and
of all nations that come to them, does warrant me. And although I have as yet found no
extraordinary good or wondrous effect in them, but rather having somewhat curiously
examined the matter, I find all the reports of such operations, which in such places are
reported, and of many believed, to be false and fabulous. So easily does the world deceive
itself, namely, in things it desires or faine would have come to pass. Yet have I seen
but few or none at al whom these waters have made worse; and no man can without
malice denie but that they stir up a mans appetite, make easy digestion, and except a
man go to them overweake and faint (which I would have none do) they will adde a
kind of new mirth unto him. They have not the power to raise men from desperate
diseases. They may stay some light accident, or prevent the threats of some alteration.
Whosoever goeth to them and resolveth not to be merry, that so he may enjoy the pleasure
of the good company resorts to them, and of the pleasant walks or exercises which the
beauty of those places, where bathes are commonly seated, does affoord and delight men
withall; he without doubt loses the better part and most assured of their effect. And
therefore have I hitherto chosen to stay my self and make use of those, where I found the
pleasure of the situation most delightsome, most conveniencie of lodging, of victuals and
company, as are in France the bathes of Banieres; those of Plombieres, on the frontiers of

Germany and Loraine: those of Baden in Switzerland; those of Luca in Tuscanie; and
especially those of della Villa, which I have used most often and at diverse seasons of the
yeare. Every nation has some particular opinion concerning their use, and severall laws
and formes how to use them, and all different: and as I have found by experience the
effect in a manner all one. In Germany they never use to drinke of the waters, but bathe
themselves for all diseases, and will lie paddling in them almost from sunne to sunne. In
Italie, if they drinke nine dayes of the water, they wash themselves other thirty dayes with
it. And commonly they drinke it mixt with other drugges, thereby to helpe the operation.
Here, our physicians appoint us when we have drunke to walk upon it that so we may
helpe to digest it: there, so soone as they have drunke, they make them lie a bed until they
have voyded the same out again, continually warming their stomack and feete with
warme clothes. All the Germanes while they lie in the water do particularly use
cupping glasses and scarifications; and the Italians use their doccie, which are certain
spouts running with warme waters convayed from the bathes-spring in leaden pipes,
where, for the space of a month, they let it spout upon their heads, upon their stomacke, or
upon any other part of the body, according as neede requireth, one hour in the forenoone
and as long in the afternoone. There are infinit other differences of customs in every
countrey, or, to say better, there is almost no resemblances betweene one and the other.
See how this part of physicke by which alone I have suffered myself to be carried away,
which, though it be least artificiall, yet has she the share of the confusion and uncertainty
seen in all other parts and every where of this arte. Poets may say what they list, and with
more emphasis and grace witness these two epigrammes:
Alcon hesterno signum lovis attiqit.
Ille Quamvis marmoreus, vim patitur medici.
Ecce hodie jussus transferri ex æde vetusta,
Efertur, quamvis sit Deus atque lapis.’ --LUCIL. Auson. Epig. 73.
Alcon looked yesterday on carved Iove.
Iove, though of marble, feeles the leeches force,
From his old church to day made to remoove,
Though god and stone, he’s carried like a corse.
And the other:
Lotus nobiscu m est hilaris, cænavit et idem,
Inventus mane est mortuus Androgoras.
Tam subitæ mortis causam Faustine requiris?
Insomnis medicum viderat Hermocratem. -- Mart. vi. Epig. liii.
Androgoras in health bath’d over night with us,
And merry supt, but in the morne stark dead was found.

Of his so sudden death the cause shall I discusse?
Hermocrates the leech he saw in sleepe unsound.
Upon which I will tell you two pretty stories. The Baron of Caupene in Chalosse and I
have both in common the right of the patronage of a benefice, which is of a very large
precinct, situated at the feet of our mountaines named Lahontan. It is with the inhabitants
of that corner as it is said to be with those of the valley of Angrougne. They lead a kind of
peculiar life; their attire and their customs apart and severall. They were directed and
governed by certain particular policies and customs, received by tradition from father to
child: whereto, without other laws or compulsion except the reverence and awe of their
custom and use, they awefully tied and bound themselves. This petty state had from all
antiquity continued in so happy a condition that no neighbouring severe judge had ever
been troubled to enquire of their life and affairs, nor was ever atturny or petty-fogging
lawyer called for to give them advice or counsel; nor stranger sought unto to determine
their quarrels or decide contentions; neither were ever beggars seen among them. They
alwaies avoyded commerce and shunned alliances with the other world, lest they should
alter the purity of their orders and policy, until such time (as they say) that one amongst
them in their fathers days, having a mind puft up with a noble ambition to bring his name
and credit in reputation, devised to make one of his children Sir John Lacke-latine or
Master Peter-an-oake: and having made him learne to write in some neigbbour town not
far off, at last procured him to be a country Notary or petty-fogging clark. This fellow
having gotten some pelfe and become great, began to disdaine their ancient customs and
put the pompe and statelines of our higher regions into their heads. It fortuned that a
chief gossip of his had a goate dis-horned, whom he so importunately solicited to sue the
trespasser and demand law and right at the justices hands that dwelt thereabouts; and so
never ceasing to sow sedition and breed suites amongst his neighbors, he never left till he
had confounded and marred all. After this corruption or intrusion of law (they say) there
ensued presently another mischief of worse consequence by means of a quacke-salver or
empirike physician that dwelt amongst them who would needs be married to one of their
daughters, and so endenizon and settle himself amongst them. This gallant began first to
teach and instruct them in the names of agues, rheumes, and impostumes; then the
situation of the heart, of the liver and other intrailes: a science until then never known or
heard of among them. And in stead of garlike, wherewith they had learned to expell and
were wont to cure all diseases of what quality and how dangerous soever they were, he
induced and inured them, were it but for a cough or cold, to take strange compositions and
potions: and thus beganne to trafficke not only their health but also their deaths. They
sweare that even from that time they apparently perceived that the evening sereine or
night-calme bred the head-ache and blasted them; that to drinke being hot or in a sweat
empaired their healths; that autumne winds were more unwholesome and dangerous than
those of the spring-time: and that since his slibber-sawces, potions, and physicke came
first in use, they find themselves molested and distempered with legions of unaccustomed
maladies and unknown diseases, and plainly feel and sensibly perceive a general
weaknesse and declination in their ancient vigor, and that their lives are nothing so long as

before they were. See here the first of my tales. The other is that before I was troubled
with the stone-chollicke and gravell in the bladder, hearing diverse make especiall account
of a he-goates blood as a heavenly manna sent in these latter ages for the good and
preservation of mans life and hearing men of good understanding speak of it as of an
admirable and much-good-working drug and of an infallible operation: I, who have ever
thought my self subject to all accidents that may in any sort fall on man, being yet in
perfect health, began to take pleasure to provide my self of this myracle, and forthwith
gave order (according to the receipt) to have a buck-goate gotten and carefully fed in my
own house. For the blood must be drawne from him in the hottest month of summer, and
he must only be fed with soluble hearbes, and drincke nothing but white-wine. It was my
fortune to come to my own house the very same day the Goate should be killed; where
some of my people came in haste to tell me that my cooke found two or three great bowles
in his pauncb, which in his maw amongst his meat shocked one against another. I was so
curious as I would needs have all his garbage brought before me; the thicke and large
skinne whereof I caused to be opened, out of which came three great lumps or bodies, as
light as any spunge, so framed as they seemed to be hollow, yet outwardly hard and very
firme, bemotled with diverse dead and wannish colours; the one perfectly as round as any
bowle, the other two somewhat lesser, and not so round, yet seemed to grow towards it. I
have found (after I had made diligent inquiry among such as were wont to open such
beasts) that it was a seld-seen and unheard of accident. It is very likely they were such
stones as ours be, and cozen-germanes to them; which if it be, it is but vain for such as be
troubled with the stone or gravell to hope to be cured by means of a beasts blood, that
was drawing near unto death, and suffered the same disease. For, to aleadge the blood
cannot participate of that contagion, and does no whit thereby alter his accustomed virtue,
it may rather be inferred that nothing engendreth in a body but by consent and
communication of all the parts. The whole masse does work, and the whole frame agitate
altogether, although one part, according to the diversitie of operations, does contribute
more or less than another; whereby it manifestly appeareth that, in all parts of this bucke-
goate, there was some grettie or petrificant quality. It was not so much for fear of any
future chaunce, or in regard of my self, that I was so curious of this experiment; as in
respect, that as well in my own house as elsewere in sundry other places, it commeth to
pass that many women do often gather and lay up in store diverse such kindes of slight
druggs to help their neighbors and other people with them in time of necessitie; applying
one same remedie to an hundred severall diseases: indeed many times such as they would be
very loath to take themselves; with which they often have good lucke, and well thrives it
with them. As for me, I honor physicians, not according to the common-received rule, for
necessitie sake (for to this passage another of the prophets may be alleged who reprooved
King Asa, because he had recourse unto physicians) but rather for love I bear unto
themselves; having seen some, and known diverse honest men amongst them, and
worthy all love and esteeme. It is not them I blame, but their Arte; yet do I not greatly
condemne them for seeking to profit by our foolishnesse (for most men do so) and it is a
thing common to all worldlings. Diverse possessions and many vocations, both more and
less worthie than theirs, subsist and are grounded only upon public abuses and

popular errours. I send for them when I am sicke, if they may conveniently be found, and
love to be entertained by them, rewarding them as other men do. I give them authority to
enjoin me, to keep my self warme if I love it better so than otherwise. They may
chuse, be it either leekes or lettuce, what my broth shall be made withall, and appoint me
either white or claret to drink: and so of other things else, indifferent to my taste, humor
or custom. I know well it is nothing to them, forasmuch as sharpnesse and strangenesse
are accidents of physickes proper essence. Lycurgus allowed and appoynted the sicke men
of Sparta to drinke wine. Why did he so? Because being in health they hated the use of it.
Even as a gentleman who dwelleth not far from me useth wine as a sovereigns remedie
against agews, because being in perfect health, he hateth the taste thereof as death. How
many of them see we to be of my humor? That is, to disdaine all physicke for their own
behoofe, and live a kind of formall free life, and altogether contrary to that which they
prescribe to other? And what is that but a manifest abusing of our simplicitie. For, they
hold their life as dear and esteeme their health as pretious as we do ours, and would
apply their effects to their skill if themselves knew not the uncertainty and falsehood of it.
It is the fear of pain and death; the impatience of the disease and grief: and indiscreet
desire and headlong thirst of health, that so blindeth them and us. It is meere faintness that
makes our conceit: and pusillanimitie forceth our credulitie to be so yielding, and pliable..
The greater part of whom do notwithstanding not believe so much as they endure and
suffer of others; For I hear them complain, and speak of it no otherwise than we do.
Yet in the end are they resolved. What should I do then? As if impatience were in itself
a better remedie than patience. Is there any of them that has yielded to this miserable
subjection, that does not likewise yielde to all manner of impostures? or dooth not subject
himself to the mercy of whomsoever has the impudencie to promise him recoverie and
warrant him health?
The Babilonians were wont to carry their sicke people into the open streetes: the
common sort were there physicians: where all such as passed by were by humanitie and
civilitie to enquire of their state and maladie, and according to their skill or experience
give them some sound advise and good counsell. We differ not greatly from them: there is
no poore woman so simple whose mumbling and muttering, whose slibber-slabbes and
drenches we do not employ. And as for me, were I to buy any medicine, I would rather
spend my money in this kind of physicke than in any other, because therein is no danger
or hurt to be feared. What Homer and Plato said of the Egyptians, that they were all
physicians, may well be said of all people. There is neither man nor woman that vanteth
not himself to have some receipt or other, and does not hazard the same upon his
neighbour, if he will but give credite unto him. I was not long since in a company where I
wot not who of my fraternity brought news of a kind of pilles, by true accompt,
composed of a hundred and odde severall ingredients; whereat we laughed very heartily,
and made ourselves good sport; for what rocke so hard were able to resist the shocke or
withstand the force of so thicke and numerous a battery? I understand, nevertheless , of
such as took of them, that the least graine of gravell dained not to stir at all. I cannot so
soone give over writing of this subject, but I must needs say a word or two concerning the
experience they have made of their prescriptions, which they would have us take as a

warantice or assurance of the certainty of their drugges and potions. The greatest number,
and, as I deem, more than the two thirds of medicinable vertues, consist in the
quintessence or secret propriety of simples, whereof we can have no other instruction but
use and custom. For quintessence is no other thing than a quality, whereof we cannot
with our reason find out the cause. In such trials or experiments, those which they
affirme to have acquired by the inspiration of some dæmon, I am contented to receive and
allow of them (for touching myracles, I meddle not with them) or be it the experiments
drawne from things, which for other respects fall often in use with us: as if in wooll,
wherewith we wont to cloth ourselves, some secret exsiccating or drying quality have by
accident been found, that cureth kibes and chilblaines in the heels and if in reddishes,
we eat for nourishment, some opening or atentive operation have been discovered. Galen
reporteth that a leprous man chanced to be cured by means of a cuppe of wine he had
drunken forasmuch as a viper was by fortune fallen into the wine caske. In which example
we find the meane and a very likely director to this experience. As also in those to which
physicians affirme to have been addressed by the examples of some beasts. But in most
of other experiences to which they say they came by fortune, and had no other guide but
hazard, I find the progresse of this information incredible. I imagine man heedfully
viewing about him the infinite number of things, creatures, plants and mettals. I wot not
where to make him beginne his essay; and suppose he cast his first fantasie upon an elkes-
horne, to which an easy and gentle credulity must be given; he will be as far to seek,
and as much troubled in his second operation: so, many diseases and severall
circumstances are proposed unto him, that before he come to the certainty of this point,
unto which the perfection of his experience should arrive, mans wit shall be to seek, and
not know where to turn himself; and before (amiddest this infinity of things) he find
out what this horne is: amongst the numberlesse diseases that are, what an epilepsie is; the
sundry and manifolde complexions in a melancholy man; so many seasons in winter: so
diverse nations amongst Frenchmen; so many ages in age; so diverse celestiall changes
and alterations in the conjunction of Venus and Saturne: so severall and many partes in a
mans body, nay in one of his fingers. To all which being neither guided by Argument, nor
by conjecture, nor by example or divine inspiration, but by the only motion of fortune, it
were most necessary it should be by a perfectly artificiall, well-ordred, and methodicall
fortune. Moreover, suppose the disease thorowly cured, how shall he rest assured but that
either the evil was come to his utmost period, or that an effect of the hazard caused the
same health? Or the operation of some other thing, which that day he had either eaten,
drunke or touched? or whether it were by the merite of his grandmothers prayers? Besides,
suppose this experiment to have been perfect, how many times was it applied and begun
anew; and how often was this long and tedious web of fortunes and encounters woven
over again, before a certain rule might be concluded? And being concluded, by whom is
it I pray you I? Amongst so many millions of men you shall scarce meet with three or
foure that will duely observe and carefully keep a register of their experiments: shall it
be your or his happe to light truely or hit just with one of them three or foure? What if
another man, nay, What if a hundred other men, have had and made contrary experiments,
and yet have sorted well? We should perhaps discerne some show of light if all the

judgements and consultations of men were known unto us. But that three witnesses and
three doctors shall sway all mankind, there is no reason. It were requisite humane nature
had appointed and made speciall choise of them, and that by express procuration and
letter of atturny they were by her declared our judges and deputed our atturnies.
TO MY LADY OF DURAS
MADAME, the last time it pleased you to come and visite me, you found me upon this
point. And because it may be these toyes of mine may happily come to your hands, I
would have them witness their author reputeth himself highly honoured for the favors
it shall please you to show them. Wherein you shall discerne the very same demeanor and
self-countenance you have seen in his conversation. And could I have assumed unto my
self any other fashion than my own e accustomed, or more honorable and better
form, I would not have done it: for al I seek to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
naturally represent and to the life portray me to your remembrance. The very same
condition and faculties it pleased your Ladyship to frequent and receive with much more
honor and curteke to reape by my writings is, they will
has the loving care, and careful love of your right Honorable and most prudent Parents
(thrice-honored Lady Grey) as well in language for more knowledge, more knowledge for
all virtue, as in high linage for rich dowrie, rich dowrie for great match provided for you.
An acte most worthie their Progenitors, the olde Worthies of S HREVVSBVRIE , to make
you so well worthie by your match to inherite a house no less ancient; the ancient house
of K ENT . Whereof to wish you answerable joy, to the honor of both Houses, demerite of
yourselves, comfort of all your friendes, let me but adde my wish: God give my wish
effect, and yourselves shall wish no better. And so to you (my in-hart-honoured, since
best-deserving Lady N EVILL ) I knowe not, if native inclination, proceeding from a
Father, in wisdom none greater; a Mother, in goodnesse none better; or informing
instruction, applied by his prudent direction, used by her kind discretion, received by your
quick ingenuitie, or confirming example of both them above all example, and your noble
husband excellently qualified, exquisitely languaged, and your as learned as well graced
brothers; or all these in concourse have made-uppe such accomplishment, as again I
knowe not, if you, or we all, owe more to them for you. This I knowe and acknowledge, as
to your right Honorable Father, this ages Cato, our Englands Hospitalis, I owe and vow
all service for many-many favors he has done me, more he may, and to those other for
some other: So to your Ladieship for all, who not only with them, but many more, have
not only wrought me credite to give countenance, but brought me kindenesse to afforde
commoditie. As therefore of aught else I ever may, so of this I have here done, your
Ladieship may challenge no small parte, since no small parte thereof was done under
your Fathers roofe, under your regiment. Wherefore to both your Honors (renowmed
G REY and N EVILL ) as to Iuno in Greece, or Vesta in new Rome on the Altare of your
vertues, I consecrate without idolatrie, prophanenesse, or blasphemie, both the incense of
Praise and Thankes, and the never-failing fire of and ever-faithfull affection, which the
Vestall Virgins of pure thoughts shall still-still keep alive, that while I live, and when I
die, I may be as I am Your Honors servant in true hart, I OHN F LORIO .
To the Right Ho-
norable Lady Elizabeth Grey.
Of Honorable T ALBOT honor’d-far,
The forecast and the fortune, by his W ORD
Montaigne here descrives; what by his S WORD,
What by his wit; this, as the guiding starre;
That, as th’Ætolian blast, in peace, or war,
At sea, or land, as cause did use afforde,
A VANT L E V ENT , to tackle his sailes a borde,
So as his course no orethwart crosse might barre;
But he would sweetly saile before the wind;
For Princes service, Countries good, his fame.
Heire-Daughter of that prudent-constant kind,

Joyning thereto of G REY as great a name,
Of both chief glories shrining in your mind,
Honor him, that your Honor does proclaime.
Il Candido.
To the Right Noble
and vertuous Lady Marie Nevill.
If ornaments to men, to Ladies more,
If to meane persons, more to noble mind,
Study and languages have been assignde;
How should we then admire, applaude, adore
You Madame, so adorn’d, as few before?
As if your Fathers, Husbands, Brothers kind
You were to equall or excel inclinde:
Such knowledge keeping keyes of vertues store.
Though this you know no better in your own,
Then it you knew in French, or had it been,
In Tuscane wrote, as well you had it known;
Though lesser grace in this, than that, be seen;
Yet, as your own, since you love public-weale,
Take well, we unknown goods to all reveale.
Il Candido.
Renascence
Editions

Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER I: OF PROFIT AND HONESTY






CHAPTER I: OF PROFIT AND HONESTY
O MAN living is free from speaking foolish things; the ill lucke is to
speak them curiously:
Næ iste magno conatu magnas nugas dixerit. -- Ter. Heaut. act. iv. sc. i.
This fellow sure with much a do,
Will tell great tales and trifles too.
That concerneth not me; mine slip from me with as little care as they are of smal worth:
whereby they speed the better. I would suddenly quit them, for the least cost were in them:

Nor do I buy or sell them but for what they weigh. I speak unto paper as to the first man I
meete. That this is true, marke well what followes. To whom should not treachery be
detestable, when Tiberius refused it on such great interest? One sent him word out of
Germany, that if he thought it good, Ariminius should be made away by poison. He was
the mightiest enemy the Romans had, who had so vilely used them under Varus, and who
only empeached the encrease of his domination in that country. His answer was, that the
people of Rome were accustomed to be revenged on their enemies by open courses, with
weapons in hand; not by subtill sleights , nor in hugger mugger: thus left he the profitable
for the honest. He was (you will say) a cosener. I beleive it; that’s no wonder in men of his
profession. But the confession of virtue is of no less consequence in his mouth that hateth
the same, forasmuch as truth by force does wrest it from him, and if he will not admire it
in him, at least, to adorn himself he will put it on. Our composition, both public and
private, is full of imperfection; yet is there nothing in nature unserviceable, no not inutility
itself; nothing thereof has been insinuated in this huge universe but holdeth some fit
place therein. Our essence is cymented with crased qualities; ambition, jealosie, envy,
revenge, superstition, despair, lodge in us, with so natural a possession, as their image is
also discerned in beasts: indeed cruelty, so unnaturall a vice: for in the middest of
compassion, we inwardly feel a kind of bitter-sweet-pricking of malicious delight to see
others suffer; and children feel it also:
Suave mari magno turbantibus æquora ventis,
E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem. -- Lucr. ii. 1.
’Tis sweet on graund seas, when winds waves turmoyle,
From land to see an others greevous toyle.
The seed of which qualities, who should roote out of man, should ruine the fundamental
conditions of our life: In matter of policy likewise some necessary functions are not only
base, but faulty: vices find therein a seate and employ themselves in the stitching up of
our frame; as poysons in the preservations of our health. If they become excusable
because we have neede of them, and that common necessity effaceth their true property;
let us resigne the acting of this part to hardy Citizens, who sticke not to sacrifice their.
honors and consciences, as those of old, their lives, for their Countries avail and safety.
We that are more weake had best assume taskes of more ease and less hazard. The
Common-wealth requireth some to betray, some to lie, and some to massaker: leave we
that commission to people more obedient and more pliable. Truly, I have often been
vexed to see our judges, by fraude or false hopes of favor or pardon, draw on a
malefactor, to bewray his offence; employing therein both cousenage and impudencie. It
were fit for justice, and Plato himself, who favoureth this custom, to furnish me with
means more suitable to my humor. ’Tis a malicious justice, and in my conceit no less
wounded by itself then by others. I answered not long since, that hardly could I betray
my Prince for a particular man, who should be very sory to betray a particular man for my
Prince. And loath not only to deceive, but that any be deceived in me; whereto I will

neither furnish matter nor occasion. In that little busines I have managed betweene our
Princes, amid the divisions and subdivisions which at this day so teare and turmoile us, I
have curiously heeded, that they mistake me not, nor muffled themselves in my maske.
The professors of that trade hold themselves most covert; pretending and counterfeiting
the greatest indifference and neernes to the cause they can. As for me, I offer my self in
my liveliest reasons, in a form most my own: A tender and young Negotiator, and who
had rather faile in my businesses then in my self. Yet has this been hitherto with so good
hap (for surely fortune is in these matters a principal actor) that few have dealt betwene
party and party with less suspition and more inward favor. I have in all my proceedings
an open fashion, easy to insinuate and give itself credit at first acquaintance. Sincerity,
plainenesse, and naked truth, in what age soever, find also their opportunity and
employment. Besides, their liberty is little called in question, or subject to hate, who deale
without respect of their own interest. And they may truely use the answer of Hyperides
unto the Athenians, complaining of his bitter invectives and sharpenesse of his speech:
Consider not, my masters whether I am free, but whether I be so, without taking ought, or
bettering my state by it. My liberty also has easily discharged me from all suspition of
faintnesse, by its vigor (for forbearing to speak any thing, though it bit or stung them; I
could not have said worse in their absence) and because it carrieth an apparant show of
simplicity and carelesnesse. I pretend no other fruit by negotiating then to negotiate; and
annex no long pursuites or propositions to it. Every action makes his particular game, win
he if he can. Nor am I urged with the passion of love or hate unto great men; nor is my wil
shackled with anger, or particular respect. I regard our Kings with an affection simply
lawfull and meerely civil, neither mooved nor unmoov’d by private interest: for which I
like my self the better. The general and just cause bindes me no more then moderately,
and without violent fits. I am not subject to these piercing pledges and inward gages.
Choller and hate are beyond the duty of justice, and are passions fitting only those whose
reason is not sufficient to hold them to their duty, Utatur motu animi, qui uti ratione non
potest: ’Let him use the motion of his mind that cannot use reason.’ All lawfull intentions
are of themselves temperate: if not, they are altered into sedicious and unlawful. It is that
makes me march every where with my head aloft, my face and heart open. Verily (and I
fear not to avouch it) I could easily for a neede bring a candle to Saint Michæll, and
another to his Dragon, as the good old woman. I will follow the best side to the fire, but
not into it, if I can choose. If neede require, let Montaigne my Mannor-house be
swallowed up in public ruine: but if there be no such necessity, I will acknowledge my
self beholding unto fortune if she please to save it; and for its safety employ as much
scope as my endevours can affoord me. Was it not Atticus, who, cleaving to the right (but
losing side), saved himself by his moderation, in that general Shipwracke of the world,
amidst so many changes and diverse alterations? To private men, such as he was, it is more
easy. And in such kind of business I think one dealeth justly not to be too forward to
insinuate or invite himself. To hold a staggering or middle course, to bear an unmooved
affection, and with out inclination in the troubles of his country and public divisions, I
deem neither seemely nor honest: Ea non media, sed nulla via est, velut eventum
expectantium, quo fortunæ consilia sua applicant: ’That is not the mid-way, but a mad

has the loving care, and careful love of your right Honorable and most prudent Parents
(thrice-honored Lady Grey) as well in language for more knowledge, more knowledge for
all virtue, as in high linage for rich dowrie, rich dowrie for great match provided for you.
An acte most worthie their Progenitors, the olde Worthies of S HREVVSBVRIE , to make
you so well worthie by your match to inherite a house no less ancient; the ancient house
of K ENT . Whereof to wish you answerable joy, to the honor of both Houses, demerite of
yourselves, comfort of all your friendes, let me but adde my wish: God give my wish
effect, and yourselves shall wish no better. And so to you (my in-hart-honoured, since
best-deserving Lady N EVILL ) I knowe not, if native inclination, proceeding from a
Father, in wisdom none greater; a Mother, in goodnesse none better; or informing
instruction, applied by his prudent direction, used by her kind discretion, received by your
quick ingenuitie, or confirming example of both them above all example, and your noble
husband excellently qualified, exquisitely languaged, and your as learned as well graced
brothers; or all these in concourse have made-uppe such accomplishment, as again I
knowe not, if you, or we all, owe more to them for you. This I knowe and acknowledge, as
to your right Honorable Father, this ages Cato, our Englands Hospitalis, I owe and vow
all service for many-many favors he has done me, more he may, and to those other for
some other: So to your Ladieship for all, who not only with them, but many more, have
not only wrought me credite to give countenance, but brought me kindenesse to afforde
commoditie. As therefore of aught else I ever may, so of this I have here done, your
Ladieship may challenge no small parte, since no small parte thereof was done under
your Fathers roofe, under your regiment. Wherefore to both your Honors (renowmed
G REY and N EVILL ) as to Iuno in Greece, or Vesta in new Rome on the Altare of your
vertues, I consecrate without idolatrie, prophanenesse, or blasphemie, both the incense of
Praise and Thankes, and the never-failing fire of and ever-faithfull affection, which the
Vestall Virgins of pure thoughts shall still-still keep alive, that while I live, and when I
die, I may be as I am Your Honors servant in true hart, I OHN F LORIO .
To the Right Ho-
norable Lady Elizabeth Grey.
Of Honorable T ALBOT honor’d-far,
The forecast and the fortune, by his W ORD
Montaigne here descrives; what by his S WORD,
What by his wit; this, as the guiding starre;
That, as th’Ætolian blast, in peace, or war,
At sea, or land, as cause did use afforde,
A VANT L E V ENT , to tackle his sailes a borde,
So as his course no orethwart crosse might barre;
But he would sweetly saile before the wind;
For Princes service, Countries good, his fame.
Heire-Daughter of that prudent-constant kind,

Joyning thereto of G REY as great a name,
Of both chief glories shrining in your mind,
Honor him, that your Honor does proclaime.
Il Candido.
To the Right Noble
and vertuous Lady Marie Nevill.
If ornaments to men, to Ladies more,
If to meane persons, more to noble mind,
Study and languages have been assignde;
How should we then admire, applaude, adore
You Madame, so adorn’d, as few before?
As if your Fathers, Husbands, Brothers kind
You were to equall or excel inclinde:
Such knowledge keeping keyes of vertues store.
Though this you know no better in your own,
Then it you knew in French, or had it been,
In Tuscane wrote, as well you had it known;
Though lesser grace in this, than that, be seen;
Yet, as your own, since you love public-weale,
Take well, we unknown goods to all reveale.
Il Candido.
Renascence
Editions

Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER I: OF PROFIT AND HONESTY






CHAPTER I: OF PROFIT AND HONESTY
O MAN living is free from speaking foolish things; the ill lucke is to
speak them curiously:
Næ iste magno conatu magnas nugas dixerit. -- Ter. Heaut. act. iv. sc. i.
This fellow sure with much a do,
Will tell great tales and trifles too.
That concerneth not me; mine slip from me with as little care as they are of smal worth:
whereby they speed the better. I would suddenly quit them, for the least cost were in them:

Nor do I buy or sell them but for what they weigh. I speak unto paper as to the first man I
meete. That this is true, marke well what followes. To whom should not treachery be
detestable, when Tiberius refused it on such great interest? One sent him word out of
Germany, that if he thought it good, Ariminius should be made away by poison. He was
the mightiest enemy the Romans had, who had so vilely used them under Varus, and who
only empeached the encrease of his domination in that country. His answer was, that the
people of Rome were accustomed to be revenged on their enemies by open courses, with
weapons in hand; not by subtill sleights , nor in hugger mugger: thus left he the profitable
for the honest. He was (you will say) a cosener. I beleive it; that’s no wonder in men of his
profession. But the confession of virtue is of no less consequence in his mouth that hateth
the same, forasmuch as truth by force does wrest it from him, and if he will not admire it
in him, at least, to adorn himself he will put it on. Our composition, both public and
private, is full of imperfection; yet is there nothing in nature unserviceable, no not inutility
itself; nothing thereof has been insinuated in this huge universe but holdeth some fit
place therein. Our essence is cymented with crased qualities; ambition, jealosie, envy,
revenge, superstition, despair, lodge in us, with so natural a possession, as their image is
also discerned in beasts: indeed cruelty, so unnaturall a vice: for in the middest of
compassion, we inwardly feel a kind of bitter-sweet-pricking of malicious delight to see
others suffer; and children feel it also:
Suave mari magno turbantibus æquora ventis,
E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem. -- Lucr. ii. 1.
’Tis sweet on graund seas, when winds waves turmoyle,
From land to see an others greevous toyle.
The seed of which qualities, who should roote out of man, should ruine the fundamental
conditions of our life: In matter of policy likewise some necessary functions are not only
base, but faulty: vices find therein a seate and employ themselves in the stitching up of
our frame; as poysons in the preservations of our health. If they become excusable
because we have neede of them, and that common necessity effaceth their true property;
let us resigne the acting of this part to hardy Citizens, who sticke not to sacrifice their.
honors and consciences, as those of old, their lives, for their Countries avail and safety.
We that are more weake had best assume taskes of more ease and less hazard. The
Common-wealth requireth some to betray, some to lie, and some to massaker: leave we
that commission to people more obedient and more pliable. Truly, I have often been
vexed to see our judges, by fraude or false hopes of favor or pardon, draw on a
malefactor, to bewray his offence; employing therein both cousenage and impudencie. It
were fit for justice, and Plato himself, who favoureth this custom, to furnish me with
means more suitable to my humor. ’Tis a malicious justice, and in my conceit no less
wounded by itself then by others. I answered not long since, that hardly could I betray
my Prince for a particular man, who should be very sory to betray a particular man for my
Prince. And loath not only to deceive, but that any be deceived in me; whereto I will

neither furnish matter nor occasion. In that little busines I have managed betweene our
Princes, amid the divisions and subdivisions which at this day so teare and turmoile us, I
have curiously heeded, that they mistake me not, nor muffled themselves in my maske.
The professors of that trade hold themselves most covert; pretending and counterfeiting
the greatest indifference and neernes to the cause they can. As for me, I offer my self in
my liveliest reasons, in a form most my own: A tender and young Negotiator, and who
had rather faile in my businesses then in my self. Yet has this been hitherto with so good
hap (for surely fortune is in these matters a principal actor) that few have dealt betwene
party and party with less suspition and more inward favor. I have in all my proceedings
an open fashion, easy to insinuate and give itself credit at first acquaintance. Sincerity,
plainenesse, and naked truth, in what age soever, find also their opportunity and
employment. Besides, their liberty is little called in question, or subject to hate, who deale
without respect of their own interest. And they may truely use the answer of Hyperides
unto the Athenians, complaining of his bitter invectives and sharpenesse of his speech:
Consider not, my masters whether I am free, but whether I be so, without taking ought, or
bettering my state by it. My liberty also has easily discharged me from all suspition of
faintnesse, by its vigor (for forbearing to speak any thing, though it bit or stung them; I
could not have said worse in their absence) and because it carrieth an apparant show of
simplicity and carelesnesse. I pretend no other fruit by negotiating then to negotiate; and
annex no long pursuites or propositions to it. Every action makes his particular game, win
he if he can. Nor am I urged with the passion of love or hate unto great men; nor is my wil
shackled with anger, or particular respect. I regard our Kings with an affection simply
lawfull and meerely civil, neither mooved nor unmoov’d by private interest: for which I
like my self the better. The general and just cause bindes me no more then moderately,
and without violent fits. I am not subject to these piercing pledges and inward gages.
Choller and hate are beyond the duty of justice, and are passions fitting only those whose
reason is not sufficient to hold them to their duty, Utatur motu animi, qui uti ratione non
potest: ’Let him use the motion of his mind that cannot use reason.’ All lawfull intentions
are of themselves temperate: if not, they are altered into sedicious and unlawful. It is that
makes me march every where with my head aloft, my face and heart open. Verily (and I
fear not to avouch it) I could easily for a neede bring a candle to Saint Michæll, and
another to his Dragon, as the good old woman. I will follow the best side to the fire, but
not into it, if I can choose. If neede require, let Montaigne my Mannor-house be
swallowed up in public ruine: but if there be no such necessity, I will acknowledge my
self beholding unto fortune if she please to save it; and for its safety employ as much
scope as my endevours can affoord me. Was it not Atticus, who, cleaving to the right (but
losing side), saved himself by his moderation, in that general Shipwracke of the world,
amidst so many changes and diverse alterations? To private men, such as he was, it is more
easy. And in such kind of business I think one dealeth justly not to be too forward to
insinuate or invite himself. To hold a staggering or middle course, to bear an unmooved
affection, and with out inclination in the troubles of his country and public divisions, I
deem neither seemely nor honest: Ea non media, sed nulla via est, velut eventum
expectantium, quo fortunæ consilia sua applicant: ’That is not the mid-way, but a mad

way, or no way, as of those that expect the event with intent to apply their dessignes as
fortune shall fall out.’ That may be permitted in the affairs of neighbors. So did Gelon,
the tyrant of Siracusa, suspend his inclination in the Barbarian wars against the Greeks,
keeping Ambasdours at Delphos, with presents, to watch on what side the victory would
light, and to apprehend the fittest occasion of reconcilement with the victors. It were a
kind of treason to do so in our own affairs and domesticall matters, wherein of necessity
one must resolve and take a side; but for a man that has neither charge nor express
commandement to urge him, not to busie or entermedle himself therein, I holde it more
excusable: (Yet frame I do not this excuse for my self), then in forraine and strangers
wars, wherewith, according to our laws, no man is troubled against his will.
Nevertheless, those who wholly ingage themselves into them, may carry such an order
and temper, as the storme (without offending them) may glide over their head. Had we
not reason to hope as much of the deceased Bishop of Orleans, Lord of Morvilliers? And I
know some who at this present worthily bestirre themselves, in so even a fashion or
pleasing a manner, that they are likely to continue on foote, whatsoever iniurious
alteration or fall the heavens may prepare against us. I holde it only fit for Kings to to be
angry with Kings: And mocke at those rash spirits, who from the braverie of their hearts
offer themselves to so unproportionate quarrels. For one undertaketh against a Prince, in
marching courageously for his honor, and according to his duty: If he love not such a
man, he does better: at least he esteemeth him. And the cause of laws especially, and
defense of the auncient state, has ever found this priviledge, that such as for their own
interest disturbe the same, excuse (if they honor not) their defenders. But we ought not
terme duty (as now a dayes we do) a sower rigour and intestine carbbednesse,
proceeding of private interest and passion: nor courage a treacherous and malicious
proceeding. Their disposition to frowardnesse and mischiefs, they entitle Zeale: That’s not
the cause does heate them, ’tis their own interest: They kindle a war, not because it is
just, but because it is war. Why may not a man bear himself betweene enemies featly
and faithfully? Doe it, if not altogether with an equall (for it may admit different measure
at least with a sober affection, which may not so much engage you to the one, that he
looke for al at your bands. Content your self with a moderate proportion of their favor,
and to glide in troubled waters without fishing in them. Th’ other manner of offering ones
uttermost endevours to both sides, implyeth less discretion then conscience. What knows
he to whom you betray another, as much your friend as himself, but you will do the like
for him, when his turn shall come. He takes you for a villaine: whilst that he heares you,
and gathers out of you, and makes his best use of your disloyalty. For double fellowes are
only beneficiall in what they bring, but we must looke they carry away as little as may be.
I carry nothing to the one which I may not (having opportunity) say unto the other, the
accent only changed a little: and report either but indifferent or known or common
things. No benefit can induce me to lie unto them: what is entrusted to my silence I
conceal religiously, but take as little in trust as I can. Princes secrets are a troublesome
charge to such as have nought to do with them. I ever by my good will capitulate with
them, that they trust me with very little: but let them assuredly trust what I disclose unto
them. I alwayes knew more than I wold. An open speach opens the way to another, and

draws all out, even as Wine and Love. Philippedes, in my mind, answered King
Lysimachus wisely when he demaunded of him, what of his wealth or state he should
empart unto him: Which and what you please (quoth he) so it be not your secrets. I see
every one mutiny, if another conceal the deapth or mysterie of the affairs from him,
wherein he pleaseth to employ him, or have but purloyned any circumstance from him.
For my part, I am content one tell me no more of his business then he will have me know
or deale in; nor desire I that my knowledge exceed or strain my word. If I must needs be
the instrument of cozinage it shall at least be with safety of my conscience. I will not be
esteemed a servant, nor so affectionate, nor yet so faithfull, that I be judged fit to betray
any man. Who is unfaithfull to himself may be excused if he be faithlesse to his Master.
But Princes entertaine not men by halfes, and despise bounded and conditionall service.
What remedy? I freely tell them my limits; for a slave I must not be but unto reason,
which yet I cannot compasse; And they are to blame, to exact from a free man the like
subjection unto their service, and the same obligation, which they may from those they
have made and bought, and whose fortune dependeth particularly and expresly on theirs.
The laws have delivered me from much trouble; they have chosen me a side to
followe, and appointed me a maister to obey; all other superiority and duty ought to be
relative unto that, and be restrained. Yet, may it not be concluded, that if my affection
should otherwise transport me, I would presently afforde my helping hand unto it. Will
and desires are a lawe to themselves, actions are to receive it of public institutions: All
these procedings of mine are somewhat dissonant from our formes. They should produce
no great effects, nor holde out long among us. Innocencie itself could not in these times
nor negotiate without dissimulation, nor trafficke without lying. Neither are public
functions of my diet; what my profession requires thereto, I furnish in the most private
manner I can. Being a child, I was plunged into them up to the ears, and had good
success; but I got loose in good time. I have often since shunned medling with them,
seldom accepted, and never required; ever holding my back toward ambition; but if not
as rowers, who go forward as it were backeward: Yet so, as I am less beholding to
resolution, then to my good fortune, that I was not wholly embarked in them. For there are
courses less against my taste, and more comfortable to my carriage, by which, if
heretofore it had called me to the service of the common-wealth, and my advancement
unto credit in the world: I know that in following the same I had exceeded the reason of
my conceite. Those which comm only say against my profession that what I terme liberty,
simplicity and plainenesse in my behaviour, is arte, cunning and subtilty; and rather
discretion then goodnesse, industry then nature, good wit then good hap, do me more
honor then shame. But truely they make my cunning overcunning. And whosoever has
traced me and nearely looked into my humors, Ile loose a good wager if he confesse
not that there is no rule in their schoole, could, a midde such crooked pathes and diverse
windings, square and report this natural motion, and maintaine an apparance of liberty
and licence so equall and inflexible: and that all the attention and wit is not of power to
bring them to it. The way to trueth is but one and simple, that of particular profit and
benefit of affairs a man has in charge, double, uneven and accidentall. I have often
seen these counterfet and artificiall liberties in practise, but most commonly without

success. They favor of Aesopes Asse, who in emulation of the dogge, layde his two fore-
feete very jocondly upon his masters shoulders but looke how many blandishments the
prety dogge received, under one, so many bastinadoes were redoubled upon the poore
Asses backe. Id maxime quemque decet: quod est cuiusque suum maxime: (Cic. Off. i.)
’That becomes every man especially which is his own especially.’ I will not deprive
cousinage of her rank, that were to understand the world but ill: I know it has often done
profitable service, it supporteth, indeed nourisheth the greatest part of mens vacations.
There are some lawfull vices: as many actions, or good or excusable, unlawfull. Iustice
in itself natural and universall is otherwise ordered, and more nobly distributed, then
this other especiall and nationall justice, restrained and suted to the neede of our pollicie:
Veri juris germanæque iustitiæ solidam et excess effigiem nullam tenemus: umbra et
imaginibus utimur: (Cic. Off. iii.) ’We have no lively nor life-like portraiture of upright
law and natural justice: we use but the shaddowes and colours of them.’ So that wise
Dandamys, hearing the lives of Socrates, Pythagoras and Diogenes repeated, in other
things judged them great and worth men, but overmuch subjected to the reverence of the
laws: which to authorize and second, true virtue is to decline very much from his natural
vigor: and not only by their permission, but persuasions, diverse vicious actions are
committed and take place. Ex Senatus consultis plebisque scitis scelera exercentur: ’Even
by decrees of counsell and by statute-laws are mischiefes put in practise.’ I follow the
common phrase, which makes a difference betweene profitable and honest things: terming
some natural] actions which are not only profitable but necessary, dishonest and filthy.
But to continue our examples of treason. Two which aspired unto the kingdome of Thrace
were falne into controversie for their right. The Emperor hindred them from falling
together by the ears: the one, under colour of contriving some friendly accord by an
enterview inviting the other to a feast in his house, imprisoned and murthred him. Justice
required that the Romanes should be satisfied for this outrage: some difficulties
empeached the ordinary course. What they could not lawfully do without war and
hazard, they attempted to accomplish by treason; what they coulde not honestly atchieve,
they profitably compassed. For exployting whereof, Pomponius Flaccus was thought most
fitte; who trayning the fellow into his Nettes by feigned wordes and sugred assurances, in
liew of the favor and honor he promised him, sent him bound hand and foote to Rome.
One traytor over-reached another against common custom; For, they are all full of
distrust, and ’tis very hard to surprise them in their own arte: witness the heavy and
dismall experience we have lately felt of it. Let who liste be Pomponius Flaccus; and
there are too-too many that will be so. As for my part, both my word and faith are as the
rest, pieces of this common body; their best effect is the publicke service: that’s ever
presupposed with me. But as if one should command me to take the charge of the Rolles
or Recordes of the Pallace, I would answere, I have no skill in them; or to be a leader of
Pioners, I would say, I am called to a worthier office. Even so, who would go about to
employ me, not to murther or poyson, but to lie, betraye and forsweare my self, I would
tell him, If I have robbed or stolne any thing from any man, send me rather to the Gallies.
For a Gentleman may lawfully speak, as did the Lacedemonians, defeated by Antipater,
upon the points of their agreement: ’You may impose as heavy burdens, and harmfull taxes

upon us as you please, but you lose your time to command us any shamefull or dishonest
things.’ Every man should give himself the oath, which the Aegyptian Kings solemnly
and usually presented to their judges: Not to swarve from their consciences, what
command soever they should receive from themselves to the contrary. In such
commissions there is an evident note of ignominie and condemnation. And whosoever
gives them you, accuses you; and if you conceive them right, gives you them as a trouble
and burden. As much as the public affairs amend by your endevours, your own
empaireth; the better you d o, so much the worse do you. And it shall not be newe, nor
perhaps without shadowe of justice, that he who setteth you a work, becomes
your ruine. If treason be in any case excusable, it is only then, when ’tis employed to
punish and betray treason. We shall find many treacheries to have been not refused,
but punished by them, in whose favor they were undertaken. Who knowes not the
sentence of Fabritius against Pyrrus his Physition? And the commaunder has often
severely revenge d them on the partie be employed in them, refusing so unbridled a
credite and power, and disavowing so lewde and so vile an obedience. Iaropelc, Duke of
Russia, sollicited an Hungarian Gentleman to betraye Boleslaus, King of Polonia, in
contriving his death or furnishing the Russians with means to work him some notable
mischief. This gallant presently bestirres him in it, and more than ever applying himself
to the Kings service, obtained to be of his counsell, and of those he most trusted. By
which advantages, and with the opportunity of his masters absence, he betrayed Vicilicia,
a great and rich citie, to the Russians: which was whollie sakt and burnt by them, with a
general slaughter, both of the inhabitants, of what sexe or age soever, and a great number
of nobility thereabouts, whom to that purpose be had assembled. Iaropelc, his anger thus
asswaged with revenge, and his rage mitigated (which was not without pretext, for
Boleslaus had mightily wronged and in like manner incensed him) and glutted with the
fruite of treason, examining the uglinesse thereof, naked and alone, and with impartiall
eyes beholding the same, not distempered by passion, conceived such a remorse, and
took it so to heart that he forthwith caused the eyes of his instrumentall executioner to
be pulled out, and his tongue and privy parts to be cut off. Antigonus persuaded the
Argiraspides soldiers to betray Eumenes their general, and his adversaries unto him,
whom when they had delivered, and he had caused to be slain, himself desired to be the
Commissary of divine justice, for the punishment of so detestable a trecherie: and
resigning them into the hands of the Governor of the Province, gave him express charge,
in what manner soever it were, to rid himself of them, and bring them to some
mischievious end. Whereby, of that great number they were, not one ever after sawe the
smoake of Macedon. The better they served his turn, the more wicked he judged them,
and the more worthie of punishment. The slave that betraied the corner wherein his master
P. Sulpicius lay hid, was set at liberty, according to the promise of Syllas proscription: but
according to the promise of common reason, being freed, he was throwne headlong from
off the Tarpeyan rocke. And Clovis, King of France, in liew of the golden arms he had
promised the three servants of Cannacre, caused them to be hanged, after they had by his
sollicitation betraide their maister unto him. They hang them up with the purse of their
reward about their neckes. Having satisfied their second and speciall faith, they also

satisfie the general and first. Mahomet the second, desirous to rid himself of his brother
(through jealousie of rule, and according to the stile of that race) employed one of his
officers in it; who stifled him, by in much water powred down his throate all at once:
which done, in expiation of the fact, he delivered the murtherer into the hands of his
brothers mother (for they were brethren but by the father’s side) she, in his presence,
opened his bosome, and with her own revenging handes searching for his heart, pluckt it
out and cast it unto dogges to eate. Even unto vile dispositions (having made use of a
filthy action) it is so sweet and pleasing, if they may with security, as it were, in way of
recompence and holy correction, sowe one sure stitch of goodnesse and justice unto it.
Besides, they respect the ministers of such horrible crimes as people that still upbraide
them with them, and covet by their deaths to smother the knowledge and cancell the
testimony of their practises. Now if, perhaps, not to frustrate the public neede of that last
and desperate remedy, one rewarde you for it: yet he who does it (if he be not as bad
himself), will hould you a most accursed and execrable creature. And deemeth you a
greater traytor than he whom you have betrayed; for with your own han des he touched
the lewdnesse of your disposition, without disavowing, without object. But employeth
you, as we do out- cast persons in the executions of justice; an office as profitable as little
honest. Besides the basenesse of such commissions, there is in them a prostitution of
conscience. The daughter of Sejanus could not in Rome, by any true formall course of
lawe, be put to death, because she was a virgine: that laws might have their due course,
she was first deflowred by the common hang-man and then strangled. Not his hand
only, but his soul is a slave unto public commodity. When Amurath the first to
agravate the punishment of his subjects who had given support unto his son’s unnatural
rebellion, appointed their neerest kinsmen to lend their hands unto this execution: I find it
very honest in some of them, who rather chose unjustly to be held guiltie of anothers
parricide then to serve justice with their own. And whereas in some paltrie townes forced
in my time, I have seen base varlets for the savegard of their own lives, yeild to hang
their friends and companions, I ever thought them of worse condition then such as were
hanged. It is reported that Witoldus Prince of Lituania, introduced an order with that
nation, which was that the party condemned to die should, with his own hands, make
himself away; finding it strange that a third man, being guiltlesse of the fact, shoulde be
employed and charged to commit a murther. When an urgent circumstance, or any violent
and unexpected accident, induceth a Prince for the necessitie of his estate, or as they say
for state matters, to breake his worde and faith, or otherwise forceth him out of his
ordinary duty, he is to ascribe, that necessity unto a lash of Gods rod. It is no vice, for
he has quit his reason unto a reason more public and more powerfull, but surely ’tis ill
fortune. So that to one who asked me what remedy? I replyde, none; were he truely
rackt betweene these two extreames (Sed videat ne quæretur latebra periurio: (Cic. Off.
iii.) ’But let him take heede he seek not a starting hole for perjurie’) he must have done
it; but if he did it sans regret or scruple, if it greeved him not to do it, ’tis an argument
his conscience is but in ill tearmes. Now were there any one of so tender or cheverell a
conscience, to whome no cure might seem worthy of so extreme a remedy, I should
prise or regard him no whit the less. He cannot loose himself more handsomely nor

more excusablie. We cannot do every thing, nor be in every place. When all is done,
thus and thus must we often, as unto our last Anker and sole refuge, resigne the
protection of our vessell unto the only conduct of heaven. To what juster necessity can
hoe reserve himself? What is less possible for him to do, then what he cannot effect,
without charge unto his faith, and imputation to his honor? things which perhaps
should be dearer to him then his own salvation and the safety of his people. When with
enfoulded arms he shall devoutly call on God for his ayde, may he not hope that his
fatherlie mercy shall not refuse the extraordinary favor and sinne-forgiving grace of his
all powerfull hand, unto a pure and righteous hand? They are dangerous examples, rare
and crased exceptions to our natural rules: we must yielde unto them, but with great
moderation and heedie circumspection. No private commodity may any way deserve we
should offer conscience th is wrong; the common-wealth may, when it is most apparant
and important. Timoleon did fitlie warrant and ward the strangenes of his exploite by the
tears he shed, remembering it was with a brotherlie hand he slew the tyrant. And it
neerely pinched his self gnawne conscience that he was compelled to purchas the
common good at the rate of his honestie. The sacred Senate itself, by his means
delivered from thraldome, durst not definitively decide of so haughtie an action and rend
in two so urgent and different semblances. But the Siracusans having opportunely and at
that very instant sent to the Corinthians to require their protection, and a governour able to
reestablish their town in former majestie, and deliver Sicilie from a number of petty
tyrants, which grievously oppressed the same, they appointed Timoleon, with this new
caveat and declaration: That according as he should well or ill demeane himself in his
charge, their sentence should incline either to grace him as the redeemer of his country or
disgrace him as the murtherer of his brother. The fantastic conclusion has some excuse
upon the danger of the example and importance of an act so different, and they did well to
discharge their judgement of it, or to embarke him some where else, and on their
considerations. Now the proceedings of Timoleon in his renowned journie did soone
yielde his cause the cleerer, so worthily and vertuously did he every way bear himself
therein. And the good hap which ever accompanied him in the encombrances and
difficulties he was to subdue in the atchievement of his noble enterprise, seemed to be
sent him by the Gods, conspiring to second, and consenting to favor his justification.
This mans end is excusable, if ever any could be. But the encrease and profit of the
public revenues, which served the Roman Senate for a pretext of the ensuing-foul
conclusion I purpose to relate, is not of su fficient force to warrant such injustice. Certain
cities had by the order and permission of the Senate, with mony purchased their liberty at
the hands of L. Sylla. The matter coming in question again, the Senate condemned
them to be fineable and taxed as before; and the mony they had employed for their
ransome should be deemed as lost and forfeited. Civill wars do often produce such
enormous examples, That we punish private men, for so much as they have beleeved us
when we were other then now we are. And one same magistrate does lay the penalty of
his change on such as cannot do withal. The scboole-master whippeth his scholler for his
docility, and the guide striketh the blind man he leadeth. A horrible image of justice.
Some rules in philosophy are both false and faint. The example proposed unto us of

respecting private utility before faith given, has not sufficient power by the circumstance
they adde unto it. Theeves have taken you, and on your oath to pay them a certain sum of
money, have set you at liberty again. They erre that say an honest man is quit of his
worde and faith without paying, beeing out of their hands. There is no such matter. What
fear and danger has once forced me to will and consent unto, I am bound to will and
performe, being out of danger and fear. And although it have but forced my tongue and
not my will, yet am I boun to make my word good and keep my promise. For my part,
when it has somet imes unadvisedly over-run my thought, yet have I made a
conscience to disavowe the same. Otherwise we should by degrees come to abolish all
the right a third man taketh and may challenge of our promises. Quasi vero forti viro vis
possit adhiberi: (Cic. Off. iii.) As though any force could be used upon a valiant man.’ ’Tis
only lawfull for our private interest to excuse the breache of promise, if we have rashlie
promised things in themservles wicked and unjust. For, the right of virtue ought to
overrule the right of our bond. I have heretofore placed Epaminondas in the first rank of
excellent men, and now recant it not. Unto what high pitch raised he the consideration of
his particular duty? who never slew man he had vanquished, who for that unvaluable
good of restoring his country her liberty, made it a matter of conscience to murther a
Tyrant or his complices, without a due and formall course of lawe: and who judged him a
bad man, how good a citizen soever, that amongst his enemies and in the fury of a battle,
spared not his friend or his hoste. See here a mind of a rich composition. He matched
unto the most violent and rude actions of men, goodnesse and courtesy, indeed the most
choise and delicate that may be found in the scboole of Philosophie. This so high-raised
courage, so swelling and so obstinate against sorow, death and povertie, was it nature or
arte made it relent, even to the utmost strai ne of exceeding tenderness and debonarety of
complexion? Being cloathed in the dreadfull livery of steele and blood, he goeth on
crushing and brusing a nation, invincible to all others but to himself: yet mildely
relenteth in the midst of a combat or confusion, when he meets with his host or with his
friend. Verily this man was deservedly fit to command in war, which in the extremest
fury of his innated rage, made him to feel the sting of courtesys and remorse of
gentlenesse then when, all inflamed, it foamed with fury and burned with murder. ’Tis a
miracle to be able to join any show of justice with such actions. But it onIy belongeth to
the unmatched courage of Epaminondas, in that confused plight, to join mildness and
facility of the most gentle behaviour that ever was unto them, indeed, and pure innocency it
self. And whereas one told the Mamertins, that statutes were of no force against armed
men: another to the Tribune of the people, that the time of justice and war were two: a
third, that the confused noise of war and clangor of arms bindred him from
understanding the sober voice of the laws: This man was not so much as empeached from
conceiving the mild sound of civilitie and kindness. Borroived he of his enemies the
custom of sacrificing to the muses (when he went to the wars) to qualifie by their
sweetness and mildness that martiall fury and hostile surlinesse? Let us not fear, after
so great a master, to hold that some things are unlawfull, even against our fellest enemies:
that public interest ought not to challenge all of all against private interest: Manente
memoria etiam in dissidio publicorum foederum privati juris: ’Some memory of private

right continuing even in disagreement of public contracts.’
-----et nulla potentia vires
Præstandi, ne quid peccet amicus, habet: -- Ovid. Pont. i. El. viii. 37.
No power has so great might,
To make friends still go right.
And that all things be not lawfull to an honest man, for the service of his King, the
general cause and defense of the laws. Non enim patria præstat omnibus officiis, et ipsi
conducit pios habere cives in parentes: (Cic. Off. iii.) ’For our countrey is not above all
other duties: it is good for the country to have her inhabitans use pietie toward their
parents.’ ’Tis an instruction befitting the times: we need not harden our hearts with these
plates of iron and steele; it sufficeth our shoulders be armed with them: it is enough to
d’ipe our pens in inke, too much to die them in blood. If it be greatness of courage, and
th’ effect of a rare and singular virtue, to neglect friendship, despise private respects and
bonds; ones word and kindred, for the common good and obedience of the Magistrate: it is
verily able to excuse us from it, if we but alledge that it is a greatness unable to lodge in
the greatness of Epaminondas his courage. I abhorre the enraged admonitions of this
other unruly spirit.
----- dum tela micant, non vos pietatis imago
Ulla, nec adversa conspecti fronte parentes
Commoveant, vultus gladio turbante verendos. -- Lucan. vii. 320. Cæs.
While swords are brandisht, let no show of grace
Once moove you, nor your parents face to face,
But with your swords disturb their reverend grace.
Let us bereave wicked, bloody and traiterous dispositions of this pretext of reason: leave
we that impious and exorbitant justice, and adhere unto more humane imitations. Oh, what
may time and example bring to pass! In an encounter of the civill wars against Cinna,
one of Pompeyes soldiers, having unwittingly slain his brother, who was on the other
side, through shame and sorrow presently killed himself; And some yeeres after, in
another civill war of the said people, a souldier boldly demanded a reward of his
Captains for killing his own brother. Falsly do we argue honor, and the beautie of an
action, by it’s profit: and conclude as ill, to think every one is bound unto it, and that it is
honest if it be commodious.
Omnia non pariter rerum sunt omnibus apta. -- Prop. iii. El. viii. 7.
All things likewise to all

Do not well-fitting fall.
Choose we out the most necessary and most beneficiall matter of humane society, it will
be a mariage; yet is it that the Saints counsell findeth and deemeth the contrary side more
honest, excluding from it the most reverend vocation of men; as we to our races assigne
such beasts as are of least esteeme.



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER II: OF REPENTING






CHAPTER II: OF REPENTING
THERS fashion man, I repeat him; and represent a particular one, but
ill made; and whom were I to form a new, he should be far other than
he is; but he is now made. And though the lines of my picture change
and vary, yet loose they not themselves. Th e world runnes all on
wheeles. All things therein moove without intermission; indeed, the earth,
the rockes of Caucasus, and the Pyramides of Egypt, both with the
public and their own motion. Constancy itself is nothing but a
languishing and wavering dance. I cannot settle my object; it goeth so unquietly and
staggering, with a natural drunkennesse; I take it in this plight as it is at the instant I
ammuse my self about it, I describe not the essence but the passage; not a passage from
age to age, or as the people reckon, from seaven years to seaven, but from day to day,
from minute to minute. My history must be fitted to the present. I may soone change, not
only fortune, but intention. It is a counter-roule of diverse and variable accidents or
irresolute imaginations, and sometimes contrary; whether it be that my self am other, or
that I apprehend subjects by other circumstances and considerations. Howsoever, I may

perhaps gain-say my self, but truth (as Demades said) I never gain-say. Were my mind
setled, I would not essay, but resolve my self: It is still a Prentise and a probationer. I
propose a meane life and without luster; ’Tis all one. They fasten all Morall Philosophy as
well to a popular and private life as to one of richer stuffe. Every man beareth the whole
stampe of humane condition. Authors communicate themselves unto the world by some
speciall and strange marke; I the first, by my general disposition; as Michel de
Montaigne, not as a Grammarian, or a Poet or a Lawyer. If the world complain I speak
too much of my self. I complain it speaks no more of itself. But is it reason, that
being so private in use, I should pretend to make my self public in knowledge? Or is it
reason I should produce into the world, where fashion and arte have such sway and
command, the raw and simple effects of nature, and of a nature as yet exceeding weak? To
write bookes without learning is it not to make a wall without stone or such like thing?
Conceits of music are directed by arte, mine by hap. Yet have I this according to
learning, that never man handled subject he understood or knew better then I do this I
have undertaken, being therein the cunningest man alive.
Secondly, that never man waded further into his matter, nor more distinctly sifted the
parts and dependances of it, nor arrived more exactly and fully to the end he proposed
unto himself. To finish the same, I have neede of naught but faithfulnesse; which is
therein as sincere and pure as may be found. I speak truth, not my belly-full, but as much
as I dare; and I dare the more the more I grow into years, for it seems, custom
alloweth old age more liberty to babbel, and indiscretion to talk of itself. It cannot
herein be, as in trades, where the Crafts-man and his work do often differ. Being a man
of so sound and honest conversation, wrote he so foolishly? Are such learned writings come
from a man of so weake a conversation? who has but an ordinary conceit, and writeth
excellently, one may say his capacitie is borrowed, not of himself. A skilfull man is not
skilfull in all things; But a sufficient man is sufficient every where, even unto ignorance.
Here my books and my self march together, and keep one pace. Else-where one may
commend or condemne the work without the work-man, here not; who toucheth one
toucheth the other. He who shall judge of it without knowing him shal wrong himself
more then me, he that knows it has wholly satisfied me. Happie beyond my merite, if I
get this only portion of public approbation, as I may cause men of understanding to
think I had been able to make use and benefit of learning, had I been endowed with
any, and deserved better helpe of memory; excuse we here what I often say that I
seldom repent my self, and that my conscience is contented with itself; not of an
Angels or a horses conscience, but as of a mans conscience. Adding ever this clause, not
of ceremony, but of true and essentiall submission; that I speak enquiring and doubting,
meerely and simply referring my self, from resolution, unto common and lawfull
opinions. I teach not; I report: No vice is absolutely vice, which offendeth not, and a
sound judgement accuses not: For, the deformitie and incommoditie thereof is so
palpable, as perhaps they have reason who say it is chiefly produced by sottishnesse
and brought forth by ignorance; so hard is it to imagine one should know it without hating
it. Malice sucks up the greatest part of her own venome, and therewith impoysoneth
herself. Vice leaveth, as an ulcer in the flesh, a repentance in the soul, which still

scratcheth and bloodieth itself. For reason effaceth other griefes and sorrowes, but
engendereth those of repentance: the more yrkesome because inward: as the colde and
heate of agues is more offensive then that which comes outward. I account vices (but each
according to their measure) not only those which reason disalowes and nature
condemnes, but such as mans opinion has forged as false and erroneous, if laws and
custom authorize the same. In like manner there is no goodnesse but gladdeth an honest
disposition. There is truely I wot not what kind or congratulation of well doing which
rejoyceth in ourselves, and a generous jollitie that accompanieth a good conscience. A
mind courageously vicious may happily furnish itself with security, but she cannot be
fraught with this self-[joying] delight and satisfaction. It is no smal pleasure for one to
feel himself preserved from the contagion of an age so infected as ours, and to say to
himself; could a man enter and see even into my soul, yet shold he not find me guilty
either of the affliction or ruine of any body, nor culpable of envie or revenge, nor of
public offence against the laws, nor tainted with innovation, trouble or sedition; nor
spotted with falsifying of my word: and although the liberty of times slowed and taught it
every man, yet could I never be induced to touch the goods or dive into the purse of any
French man, and have alwayes lived upon my own as well in time of war as peace: nor
did I ever make use of any poore mans labor without reward. These testimonies of an
unspotted conscience are very pleasing, which natural joy is a great benefit unto us: and
the only payment never faileth us. To ground the recompence of vertuous actions upon
the approbation of others is to undertake a most uncertaine or troubled foundation, namely
in an age so corrupt and times so ignorant as this is: the vulgar peoples good opinion is is
injurious. Whom trust you in seeing what is commendable? God keep me from being an
honest man, according to the description I dayly see made of honor, each one by
himself. Quæ fuerant vitia, mores sunt. ’What earst were vices are now grown fashions.’
Some of my friends have sometimes attempted to schoole me roundly, and sift me plainly,
either of their own motion, or envited by me, as to an office, which to a well composed
mind, both in profit and lovingnesse, exceedeth all the duties of sincere amity. Such have
I ever entertained with open arms of curtesie and kind acknowledgement. But now to
speak from my conscience I often found so much false measure in their reproaches and
praises, that I had not greatly erred if I had rather erred then done well after their fashion.
Such as we especially, who live a private life not exposed to any gaze but our own, ought
in our hearts establish a touch-stone, and there to touch our deedes and try our actions; and
accordingly, now cherish and now chastise ourselves. I have my own laws and tribunall,
to judge of me, whither I addresse my self more then any where els. I restraine my
actions according to other, but extend them according to my self. None but yourse lf
knows rightly whether you be demiss and cruel, or loyal and devout. Others see you not,
but ghesse you by uncertaine conjectures. They see not so much your nature as your arte.
Adhere not then to their opinion, but hold unto your own. Tuo tibi judicio est utendum,
Virtutis et viciorum grave ipsius conscientiæ pondus est: qua sublata jacent omnia: (Cic.
Nat. Deor. iii.) ’You must use your own judgement. The weight of the very conscience of
vice and vertues is heavy: take that away and al is down.’ But whereas it is said that
repentance neerely followeth sin, seems not to imply sinne placed in his rich array,

which lodgeth in us as in his proper mansion. One may disavow and disclaime vices that
surprise us, and whereto our passions transport us; but those which by long habite are
rooted in a strong and ankred in a powerfull will, are not subject to contradiction.
Repentance is but a denying of our will, and an opposition of our fantasies which diverts
us here and there. It makes some disavow his former virtue and continencie.
Quæ mens est hodie, cur eadem non puero fuit,
Vel cur his animis incolumes non redeunt genæ? --Hor. Car. iv. Od. x. 7.
Why was not in a youth same mind as now?
Or why bears not this mind a youthfull brow?
That is an exquisite life which even in his own private keepeth itself in awe and order.
Every one may play the jugler and represent an honest man upon the stage; but within, and
in bosome, where all things are lawfull, where all is concealed; to keep a due rule or
formall decorum, that’s the point. The next degree is to be so in ones own home, and in
his ordinary actions, whereof we are to give accoumpt to nobody, wherein is no study, nor
art; and therefore Bias describing the perfect state of a family whereof (says he) the
maister be such inwardly by himself, as he is outwardly, for fear of the laws, and
respect of mens speaches. And it was a worthy saying of Iulius Drusus to those work-
men, which for three thousand crownes offered so to reforme his house that his
neighbors should no more over looke into it. I will give you sixe thousand (said he) and
contrive it so that on all sides every man may looke into it. The custom of Agesilaus is
remembred with honor, who in his travaile was wont to take up his lodging in churches,
that the people and Gods themselves might pry into his private actions. Some have been
admirable to the world, in whom nor his wife, nor his servants ever noted anything
remarkeable. ’Few men have been admired of their familiars. No man has been a
Prophet, not only in his house, but in his own country,’ says the experience of histories.
Even so in things of nought. And in this base example is the image of greatness
discerned. In my climate of Gascoigne they deem it a jest to see me in print. The further
the knowledge which is taken of me is from my home, of so much more woorth am I. In
Guyenne I pay Printers, in other places they pay me. Upon this accident they ground, who
living and present keep close-lurking, to purchase credit when they shall be dead and
absent. I had rather have less. And I cast not my self into the world, but for the portion I
draw from it. That done I quit it. The people attend on such a man with wonderment, from
a public act, unto his own doores; together with his roabes he leaves of his part: falling
so much the lower by how much higher he was mounted. View him within, there all is
turbulent, disordered and vile. And were order and formality found in him, a lively,
impartiall and well sorted judgement is required to perceive and fully to discerne him in
these base and private actions. Considering that order is but a dumpish and drowsie
virtue: to gain a Battaile, perfourme an Ambassage, and governe a people, are noble and
woorthy actions; to chide, laugh, sell, pay, love, hate, and mildely and justly to converse
both with his own and with himself; not to relent, and not gain-say himself, are

thinges more rare, more difficult and less remarkeable.
Retired lives sustain that way, whatever some say, offices as much more crabbed and
extended than other lives do. And private men (says Aristotle) serve virtue more hardly
and more highly attend her, then those which are magistrates or placed in authority. We
prepare ourselves unto eminent occasions, more for glory then for conscience. The nearest
way to come unto glory were to do that for conscience which we do for glory. And me
seems the virtue of Alexander representeth much less vigor in her large Theater then
that of Socrates in his base and obscure exercitation. I easily conceive Socrates in the
roome of Alexander; Alexander in that of Socrates I cannot. If any aske the one what he
can do, he will answer, ’Conquer the world’: let the same question be demanded of the
other, he will say, ’Leade my life conformably to its natural condition’; A science much
more generous, more important, and more lawfull.
The woorth of the mind consisteth not in going high, but in marching orderly. Her
greatness is not exercised in greatness; in mediocritye it is. As those which judge and
touch us inwardely make no great accoumpt of the brightnesse of our public actions,
and see they are but streakes and poyntes of clear Water surging from a bottome
otherwise slimie and full of mud: So those who judge us by this gay outward apparance
conclude the same of our inward constitution, and cannot couple popular faculties as
theirs are, unto these other faculties, which amaze them so far from their levell. So do
we attribute savage shapes and ougly formes unto divels. As who doeth not ascribe high-
raised eye-browes, open nostrils, a stern frightfull visage and a huge body unto
Tamberlaine, as is the form or shape of the imagination we have fore-conceived by the
bruite of his name? had any heretofore showed me Erasmus, I could hardly had bin
induced to think but whatsover he had said to his boy or hostes, had been Adages and
Apothegmes. We imagine much more fitly an Artificer upon his close stoole or on his
wife, then a great judge, reverend for his carriage and regardfull for his sufficiencie; we
think, that from those high thrones they should not abase themselves so low, as to live. As
vitious mindes are often incited to do well by some strange impulsion, so are vertuous
spirits mooved to do ill. They must then be judged by their settled estate, when they are
neare themselves, and as we say, at home, if at any time they be so; or when they are
nearest unto rest, and in their natural seate. Naturall inclinations are by institution helped
and strengthned, but they neither change nor exceed. A thousand natures in my time have
a thwart, a contrary discipline escaped toward virtue or toward vice.
Sic ubi desuetæ silvis in carcere clausæ
Mansuevere feræ, et vultus posuere minaces,
Atque hominem didicere pati, si torrida parvus
Venit in ora cruor, redeunt rabiesque furorque,
Admonitæque tument gustato sanguine fauces,
Fervet, et a trepido vix abstinet ira magistro. -- Lucan. iv. 237.
So when wild beasts, disused from the wood,
Fierce looks laid-down, grow tame, closde in a cage,

Taught to bear man, if then a little blood
Touch their hot lips, fury returnes and rage;
Their jawes by taste admonisht swell with vaines,
Rage boyles, and from faint keeper scarse abstaines.
These originall qualities are not grubd out, they are but covered and hidden. The Latine
tongue is to me in a manner natural; I understand it better then French: but it is now fortie
years I have not made use of it to speak, nor much to write; yet in some extreme
emotions and suddaine passions, whe rein I have twice or thrice falne, since my years of
discretion, and namely once, when my father being in perfect health, fell all along upon
me in a swoune, I have ever, even from my very hart uttered my first words in latine:
nature rushing and by force expressing itself, against so long a custom; the like
example is alleadged of diverse others. Those which in my time have attempted to correct
the passions of the world by new opinions, reforme the vices of apparance; those of
essence they leave untouched if they encrease them not. And their encrease is much to be
feared. We willingly protract al other well- doing upon these externall reformations of
less cost and of greater merit; whereby we satisfie good cheape, other natural
consubstantiall and intestine vices. Looke a little into the course of our experience. There
is no man (if he listen to himself) that does not discover in himself a peculiar form of
his, a swaying form, which wrestleth against the institution, and against the tempests of
passions, which are contrary unto him. As for me, I feel not my self much agitated by a
shocke; I commonly find my self in my own place, as are sluggish and lumpish
bodies. If I am not close and neare unto my self, I am never far-offe; My debauches or
excesses transport me not much. There is nothing extreme and strange; yet have I sound
fits and vigorous lusts. The true condemnation, and which toucheth the common fashion
of our men, is that their very retreate is full of corruption and filth. The Idea of their
amendment blurred and deformed; their repentance crazed and faultie very near as much
as their sinne. Some, either because they are so fast and naturally joined unto vice, or
through long custom have lost all sense of its uglinesse. To others (of whose rank I am)
vice is burthenous, but they counter-balance it with pleasure or other occasions, and
suffer it, and at a certain rate lend themselves unto it though basely and viciously. Yet
might happily so remote a disposition of measure be imagined, where with justice, the
pleasure might excuse the offence, as we say of profit. Not only being accidentall, and
out of sinne, as in thefts, but even in the very exercise of it, as in the acquaintance or
copulation with women; where the provocation is so violent, and as they say, sometime
unresistible. In a town of a kinsman of mine, the other day, being in Armignac, I saw a
country man, commonly sirnamed the Theefe, who himself reported his life to have
been thus. Being borne a begger, and perceiving that to get his bread by the sweate of his
browe and labor of his bands, would never sufficiently arm him against penury, he
resolved to become a Theefe; and that trade had employed all his youth safely, by means
of his bodily strength: for he ever made up Harvest and Vintage in other mens grounds:
but so far off, and in so great heapes, that it was beyond imagination one man should in
one night carry away so much upon his shoulders: and was so careful to equall the pray

and disperce the mischief he did, that the spoile was of less import to every particular
man.
He is now in old years indifferently rich; for a man of his condition (Godamercy his
trade) which he is not ashamed to confesse openly. And to reconcile himself with God,
he affirmeth; to be dayly ready, with his gettings, and other good turnes, to satisfie the
posterity of those he has heretofore wronged or robbed; which if himself be not of
abilitie to performe (for he cannot do all at once) he will charge his heirs withall,
according to the knowledge he has of the wrongs by him done to every man. By this
description, be it true or false, he respecteth theft, as a dishonest and unlawfull action,
and hateth the same: yet less then pinching want: He repents but simply; for in regard it
was so counterballanced and recompenced, he repenteth not. That is not that habit which
incorporates us unto vice, and confirmeth our understanding in it; nor is it that boysterous
winde, which by violent blastes dazeleth and troubleth our mindes, and at that time
confoundes and overwhelmes both us, our judgement, and all into the power of vice. What
I do is ordinarily full and compleate, and I march (as we say) all in one pace: I have not
many motions, that hide themselves and slinke away from my reason, or which very neare
are not guided by the consent of all my partes, without division, or intestine sedicion: my
judgement has the whole blame or commendation; and the blame it has once, it has
ever: for almost from it’s birth it has been one of the same inclination, course and force.
And in matters of general opinions, even from my infancy, I ranged my self to the point
I was to hold. Some sinnes there are outrageous, violent and suddaine; leave we them.
But those other sinnes, so often reassumed, determined and advised upon, whether they
be of complexion, or of profession and calling, I cannot conceive how they should so long
be settled in one same courage, unless the reason and conscience of the sinner were
thereunto inwardly privie and constantly willing. And how to imagine or fashion the
repentance thereof, which, he vanteth, does some times visit him, seems somewhat hard
unto me. I am not of Pythagoras Sect, that men take a new soul, when to receive Oracles
they approach the images of Gods, unless he would say with all, that it must be a strange
one, new, and lent him for the time: our own, giving so little signe of purification, and
cleanesse worthie of that office. They do altogether against the Stoycall precepts, which
appoint us to correct the imperfections and vices we find in ourselves, but withall forbid
us to disturbe the quiet of our mind. They make us believe they feel great remorse, and
are inwardly much displeased w ith sinne; but of amendment, correction or intermission,
they show us none. Surely there can be no perfect health, where the disease is not
perfectly remooved. Were repentance put in the scale of the balance, it would weigh
down sinne. I find no humor so easy to be counterfeited as Devotion: If one conforme
not his life and conditions to it, her essence is abstruse and concealed, her apparance
gentle and stately. For my part, I may in general wish to be other then I am; I may
condemne and mislike my universall form, I may beseech God to grant me an undefiled
reformation, and excuse my natural weakenesse: but meeseemeth I ought not to tearme
this repentance, no more then the displeasure of being neither Angell nor Cato. My
actions are squared to what I am and confirmed to my condition. I cannot do better: And
repentance does not properly concern what is not in our power; sorrow does. I may

imagine infinite dispositions of a higher pitch, and better governed then myne, yet do I
nothing better my faculties; no more then mine arm becomes stronger, or my wit more
excellent, by conceiving some others to be so. If to suppose and wish a more nobler
working then ours, might produce the repentance of our own, we should then repent us
of our most innocent actions: for so much as we judge that in a more excellent nature, they
had been directed with greater perfection and dignity; and ourselves would do the like.
When I consult with my age of my youthes proceedings, I find that commonly (according
to my opinion), I managed them in order. This is all my resistance is able to performe. I
flatter not myself: in like circumstances, I should ever be the same. It is not a spot, but a
whole dye that staynes me. I acknowledge no repentance, this is superficiall, meane, and
ceremonious. It must touch me on all sides before I can terme it repentance. It must pinch
my entrailes, and afflict them as deepely a nd throughly as God himself beholds me.
When in negotiating, many good fortunes have slipt me for want of good discretion, yet
did my projects make good choice, according to the occurrences presented unto them.
Their manner is ever to take the easier and surer side. I find that in my former
deliberations, I proceeded, after my rules, discreetely for the subjects state propounded to
me; and in like occasions, would proceede likewise a hundred years hence. I respect not
what now it is, but what it was, when I consulted of it. The consequence of all dessignes
consists in the seasons; occasions pass, and matters change uncessantly. I have in my
time run into some grosse, absurde, and important errors; not for want of good advise,
but of good happe. There are secret and indivinable parts in the objects men do handle,
especially in the nature of men and mute conditions without show, and sometimes
unknown of the very possessors, produced and stirred up by suddaine occasions. If my
wit could neyther find nor presage them, I am not offended with it; the function thereof is
contained within it’s own limits. If the success bear me, and favor the side I refused,
there is no remedy; I fall not out with my self: I accuse my fortune, not my endeavor:
that’s not called repentance. Phocion had given the Athenians some counsell, which was
not followed: the matter, against his opinion, succeeding happily: ’How now, Phocion
(quoth one), art you pleased the matter has thrived so well?’ ’Yea (said he) and I am
glad of it; yet repent not the advise I gave.’
When any of my friends come to me for counsell, I bestow it francklie and clearelie, not
(as well-nigh all the world does) wavering at the hazard of the matter, whereby the
contrary of my meaning may happen that so they may justly find fault with my advise for
which I care not greatly. For they shall do me wrong, and it became not me to refuse
them that dutie. I have no body to blame for my faults or misfortunes but my self. For in
effect I seldom use the advise of other unless it be for complement sake, and where I
have need of instruction or knowledge of the fact. Marry in things wherein nought but
judgement is to be employed; strange reasons may serve to sustain, but not to divert me. I
lend a favourable and courteous care unto them all. But (to my remembrance) I never
beleeved any but my own. With me they are but Flyes and Moathes, which distract my
wil. I little regard my own opinions, other mens I esteeme as little: Fortune payes me
accordingly. If I take no counsell I give as little. I am not much sought after for it, and
less credited when I give it: Neither know I any enterprise, either private or public, that

my advise has directed and brought to conclusion. Even those whom fortune had some-
way tyde thereunto, have more willingly admitted the direction of others conceits then
mine. As one that am as jealous of the rights of my quiet, as of those of my autthority; I
would rather have it thus.
Where leaving me, they jumpe with my profession, which is wholly to settle and
containe me in my self. It is a pleasure unto me to be disinteressed of other mens
affayres, and disingaged from their contentions. When sutes or businesses be over-past,
however it be, I greeve little at them. For, the imagination that they must necessarily
happen so, puts me out of pain; Behould them in the course of the Universe, and
enchained in Stoycall causes, Your fantazie cannot by wish or imagination remoove one
point of them, but the whole order of things must reverse both what is past and what is to
come. Moreover, I hate that accidentall repentance which olde age brings with it. He that
in ancient times said be was beholden to years because they had ridde him of
voluptuousness, was not of mine opinion. I shall never give impuissance thankes for any
good it can do me : Nec tam aversa unquam videbitur ab opere suo providential ut
debilitas inter optima inventa sit: ’Nor shall fore-sight ever be seen so averse from her
own work, that weakenesse be found to be one of the best things.’ Our appetites are
rare in olde-age: the blowe overpassed, a deepe saciety seazeth upon us: therein see no
conscience. Fretting care and weakenesse imprint in us an effeminate and drowzie virtue.
We must not suffer ourselves so fully to be carried into natural alterations as to corrupt
or adulterate our judgement by them. Youth and pleasure have not heretofore prevailed so
much over me, but I could ever (even in the midst of sensualities) discerne the ugly face
of sinne: nor can the distaste which years me from discerning that of voluptuousness in
in vice. Now I am no longer in it, I judge of it as if I were still there. I who lively and
attentively examine my reason, find it to be the same that possessed me in my most
dissolute and licentious age; unless, perhaps, they being enfeebled and empayred by
years, do make some difference: And find, that what delight it refuseth to affoorde me
in regarde of my bodilie health, it would no more denie me, then in times past, for the
health of my soul. To see it out of combate, I holde it not the more couragious. My
temptations are so mortified and crazed as they are not worthy of it’s oppositions: holding
but my hand before me, I becalme them. Should one present that former concupiscence
unto it, I fear it would be of less power to sustain it than heretofore it has been. I see
in it, by itself no increase of judgement, nor accesse of brightnesse; what it now judgeth,
it did then. Wherefore if there be any amendment, ’tis but diseased. Oh miserable kind of
remedie to be beholden unto sicknesse for our health. It is not for our mishap, but for the
good success of our judgement to performe this office. Crosses and afflictions make me
do nothing but curse them. They are for people that cannot be awaked but by the whip,
the course of my reason is the nimbler in prosperity. It is much more distracted and busied
in the digesting of mischiefes than of delights. I see much clearer in fair weather. Health
forewarneth me as with more pleasure, so to better purpose than sicknesse. I approached
the nearest I could unto amendment and regularity, when I should have enjoyed the same;
I should be ashamed and vexed that the misery and mishap of my old age could exceed
the health, attention, and vigor of my youth: and that I should be esteemed, not for what I

have been, but for what I am leaft to be. The happy life (in my opinion), not (as said
Antisthenes) the happy death, is it that makes mans happinesse in this world.
I have not preposterously busied my self to tie the tail of a Philosopher unto the head
and body of a varlet: nor that this paultrie end should disavow and belie the fairest,
soundest, and longest part of my life. I will present my self and make a general muster
of my whole, every where uniformally. Were I to live again it should be as I have already
lived. I neither deplore what is past, nor dread what is to come: and if I be not deceived,
the inward parts have neerely resembled the outward. It is one of the chiefest points
wherein I am beholden to fortune, that in the course of my bodies estate, each thing has
been carried in season. I have seen the leaves, the blossomes, and the fruit; and now see
the drooping and withering of it. Happily, because naturally. I bear my present miseries
the more gently because they are in season, and with greater favor make me remember
the long bappinesse of my former life. In like manner my discretion may well be of like
proportion in the one and the other time: but sure it was of much more performance, and
had a better grace, being fresh, jolly, and full of spirit, then now that it is worne, decrepite,
and toylesome.
I therefore renounce these casual and dolourous reformations. God must touch our
heartes; our conscience must amende of itself, and not by re-inforcement of our reason,
nor by the enfeebling of our appetites. Voluptuousnesse in itself is neither pale nor
discoloured to be discerned by bleare and troubled eyes. We should affect temperance
and chastity for itself, and for Gods cause, who has ordained them unto us: that which
Catars bestow upon us, and which I am beholden to my chollicke, is for neither
temperance nor chastitie: A man cannot boast of contemning or combating sensuality if
he see her not, or know not her grace, her force, and most attractive beauties. I know
them both, and therefore may speak it. But me thinks our soules in age are subject unto
more importunate diseases and imperfections then they are in youth. I said so, being
young, when my beardlesse chinne was upbraided me; and I say it again now that my
gray beard gives me authority. We entitle wisdom, the frowardnesse of our humors, and
the distaste of present things; but in truth we abandon not vices so much as we change
them; and in mine opinion for the worse. Besides a sillie and ruinous pride, combersome
tattle, wayward and unsotiable humors, superstition, and a ridiculous carking for wealth,
when the use of it is well-nigh lost, I find the more envie, injustice, and leaudnesse in it.
It sets more wrinckles in our minds then on our foreheads: nor are there any spirits, or
very rare ones, which in growing old taste not sowrely and mustily. Man marcheth
entirely towards his increase and decrease. View but the wisdom of Socrates, and diverse
circumstances of his condemnation. I dare say he something lent himself unto it by
prevarication of purpose: being so near, and at the age of seventy, to endure the
benumming of his spirits richest pace and the dimming of his accustomed brightnesse,
What Metamorphoses have I seen it daily make in diverse of mine acquaintances? It is a
powerfull maladie which naturally and imperceptibly glideth into us: There is required
great provision of study, heed, and precaution to avoid the imperfections wherewith it
chargeth us; or at least to weaken their further progresse. I find that notwithstanding all
my entrenchings, by little and little it getteth ground upon me: I hold out as long as I can,

but know not whither at length it will bring me. Happe what happe will, I am pleased the
world know from what height I tumbled.



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER III: OF THREE COMMERCES OR SOCIETIES






CHAPTER III: OF THREE COMMERCES OR SOCIETIES
E MUST not cleave so fast unto our humors and dispositions. Our
chiefest sufficiency is to apply ourselves to diverse fashions. It is a
being, but not a life, to be tied and bound by necessity to one only
course. The goodliest mindes are those that have most variety and
pliablenesse in them. Behold an honorable testimony of old Cato.
Huic versatile ingenium sic pariter ad omnia fuit, ut natum ad id unum
diceres, quodcunque ageret: (LIV. Bel. Mac. ix.) ’He had a wit so
turneable for all things likewise, as one would say he had been only borne for that he
went about to do.’ Were I to dresse my self after my own manner, there is no fashion
so good whereto I would be so affected or tied as not to know how to leave and loose it.
Life is a motion unequall, irregular, and multiforme. It is not to be the friend (less the
master) but the slave of ones self to follow uncessantly, and be so addicted to his
inclinations, as he cannot stray from them, nor wrest them. This I say now, as being
extreamly pestred with the importunity of my mind, forasmuch as she cannot ammuse
herself, but whereon it is busied; nor employ itself, but bent and whole. How light
soever the subject is one gives it, it willingly amplifiethl and wire-draws the same, even
unto the highest pitch of toile. Its idlenesse is therefore a painefull trade unto me, and

offensive to my health. Most wits have neede of extravagant stuffe, to un-benumme and
exercise themselves: mine has neede of it rather to settle and continue itself. Vitia otii
negotio discutienda sunt: (Sen. Ep. lvi.) ’The vices of idlenesse should be shaken off with
business.’ For, the most laborious care and principal studie of it is to studie itself.
Bookes are one of those businesses that seduce it from studie. At the first thoughts that
present themselves, it rouzeth up and makes proofe of all the vigor it has. It exerciseth
its function sometimes toward force, sometimes towards order and comelinesse, it
rangeth, moderates and fortifieth. It has of itself to awaken the faculties of it: Nature
having given it, as unto all other, matter of its own for advantage, subjects fit enough
whereon to devise and determine. Meditation is a large and powerfull study to such as
vigorously can taste and employ themselves therein. I had rather forge then furnish my
mind.
There is no office or occupation either weaker or stronger then that of entertaining of
ones thoughts according to the mind, whatsoever it be. The greatest make it their vacation,
Quibus vivere est cogitate, to whom it is all one to live and to meditate. Nature has also
favoured it with this priviledge, that there is nothing we can do so long, nor action
whereto we give ourselves more ordinarily and easily. It is the work of Gods (says
Aristotle) whence both their happinesse and ours proceedeth. Reading serves me
especially to awake my conceit by diverse objects: to busie my judgement, not my
memory. Few entertainements then stay me without vigor and force. ’Tis true that
courtesy and beautie possesse me as much or more then waight and depth. And because
I slumber in all other communications, and lend but the superficiall parts of my attention
unto them, it often befalleth me in such kind of weake and absurd discourses (discourses
of countenance) to blurt out and answer ridiculous toies and foolish absurdities, unworthy a
child; or wilfully to hold my Peace; therewithall more foolishly and incivilly. I have a
kind of raving fancie-full behaviour, that retireth me into my self; and on the other side,
a grosse and childish ignorance of many ordinary things; by means of which two
qualities, I have in my days committed five or six as sottish trickes as any one whosoever;
which to my derogation may be reported. But to follow my purpose, this harsh
complexion of mine makes me me nice in conversing with men (whom I must picke and
cull out for the nonce) and unfit for common actions. We live and negotiate with the
people: If their behaviour importune us, if we disdaine to lend ourselves to base and
vulgar spirits, which often are as regular as those of a finer mould; and all wisdom is
unsavourie that is not conformed to common insipience. We are no longer to inter-
meddle either with our or other mens affairs; and both publicke and private forsake such
kind of people.
The least wrested and most natural proceedings of our mind are the fairest; the best
occupations, those which are least forced. Good God, how good an office does wisdom
unto those whose desires she squareth according to their power! There is no science more
profitable. As one may, was the burden and favoured saying of Socrates: A sentence of
great substance. We must addresse and stay our desires to things most easy and neerest. Is
it not a fool-peevish humor in me to disagree from a thousand to whom my fortune
joineth me, without whom I cannot live, to adhere unto one or two that are out of my

commerce and conversion; or rather to a fantastic conceit, or fanciefull desire, for a
thing I cannot obtaine? My soft behaviours and mild manners, enemies to all sharpenesse
and foes to all bitternesse, may easily have discharged me from envie and contention: To
be beloved, I say not, but not to be hated, never did man give more occasion. But the
coldnesse of my conversation has with reason robd me of the good will of many; which
may be excused if they interpret the same to other or worse sense. I am most capable of
getting rare amities, and continuing exquisite acquaintances. For so as with so greedie
hunger I snatch at such acquaintances as answer my taste and square with my humor. I so
greedily produce and headlong cast my self upon them, that I do not easily misse to
cleave unto them, and where I light on, to make a steady impression; I have often made
happie and successefull trial of it.
In vulgar worldly friendships, I am somewhat cold and barren: for my proceeding is not
natural, if not unresisted and with hoised- full sailes. Moreover, my fortune having
enured and allured me, even from my infancie, to one sole singular and perfect amitie,
has verily, in some sort, distasted me from others: and over deeply imprinted in my
fantasies that it is a beast sociable and for companies and not of troupe, as said an ancient
writer. So that it is naturally a pain unto me to communicate my self by halves and
with modification: and that servile or suspicious wisdom which in the conversation of
these numerous and imperfect amities, is ordained and proposed unto us: Prescribed in
these dayes especially, wherein one cannot speak of the world but dangerously or falsely.
Yet I see, that who (as I do) makes for his ende, the commodities of his life (I meane
essentiall commodities) must avoide as a plague these difficulties and quaintness of
humor.
I should commend a high-raysed mind, that could both bende and discharge itself:
that where-ever her fortune might transport her, she might continue constant: that could
discourse with her neighbors of all matters, as of her building, of her bunting and of any
quarrell; and entertaine with delight a Carpenter or a Gardiner. I envie those which can be
familiar with the meanest of their followers, and vouchsafe to contract friendship and
frame discourse with their own servants. Nor do I like the advise of Plato, ever to speak
imperiously unto our attendants, without blithnesse and sance any familiarity: be it to men
or women servants. For, besides my reason, it is inhumanity and injustice to attribute so
much unto that prerogative of fortune and the governement: where less inequality is
permitted betweene the servant and master, is in my conceite the more indifferent. Some
other study to rouze and raise their mind, but I to abase and prostrate mine: it is not faulty
but in extension.
Narras et genus Aeaci,
Et pugnata sacro bella sub Ilio.
Quo Chium pretio cadum
Mercemur, quis aquam temperet ignibus,
Quo præbente domum, et quota
Pelignis caream frigoribus, taces. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. xix. 3.

You tell of Æacus the pedegree -
The wars at sacred Troye you do display.
You tell not at what price a hogs-head we
May buy of the best Wine; who shall allaye
Wine-fire with water, at whose house to holde
At what a-clock I may be kept from colde.
Even as the Lacedemonian valor had neede of moderation and of sweet and pleasing
sounds of Flutes, to flatter and allay it in time of war, least it should run head-long
into rashnesse and fury: whereas all other nations use commonly pearcing sounds and
strong shouts, which violently excite and enflame their soldiers courage: so think I
(against ordinary custom) that in the employment of our spirit, we have for the most
part more need of leade then wings; of coldnesse and quiet, then of heate and agitation.
Above all, in my mind, the only way to play the foole well is to seem wise among fooles:
to speak as though ones tongue were ever bent to Favelar’ in punta di forchetta: (Italian
prov.) ’To syllabize or speak minsingly.’ One must lend himself unto those he is with,
and sometimes affect ignorance. Set force and subtiltie aside; In common employments
’tis enough to reserve order; dragge your self even close to the ground, they will have it
so. The learned stumble willingly on this blocke: making continuall muster and open show
of their skill, and dispersing their bookes abroade: And have in these dayes so filled the
closets, and possessed the ears of Ladyes, that if they retaine not their substance, at least
they have their countenance: using in all sorts of discourse and subject how base or
popular soever, a newe, an affected and learned fashion of speaking and writing.
Hoc sermone pavent, hoc iram, gaudia, curas,
Hoc cuncta effundunt animi secreta, quid ultra?
Concumbunt docte. -- Juven. Sat. vi. 189.
They in this language fear, in this they fashion
Their joyes, their cares, their rage, their inward passion;
What more? they learned are in copulation.
And alledge Plato and Saint Thomas for things, which the first man they meete would
decide as well, and stand for as good a witness. Such learning as could not enter into
their mind, has stayed on their tongues. If the well-borne will give any credit unto me,
they shall be pleased to make their own and natural riches to prevaile and be of worth:
They hide and shroud their formes under forraine and borrowed beauties: It is great
simplicity for any body to smoother and conceal his own brightnesse, to shine with a
borrowed light: They are buried and entombed under the Arte of CAPSVLA TOTÆ. It is
because they do not sufficiently know themselves: the world containes nothing of more
beauty: It is for them to honor artes, and to beautifie embellishment. What neede they
more then to live beloved and honoured: They have, and know but too much in that

matter. There needs but a little rouzing and enflaming of the faculties that are in them.
When I see them medling with Rhetoricke, with Law, and with Logicke, and such like
trash, so vain and unprofitable for their use, I enter into fear that those who advise them
to such things, do it that they may have more law to governe them under that pretence.
For what other excuse can I devise for them? It is sufficient, that without us, they may
frame, or roule the grace of their eyes, unto cheerefulnesse, unto severity, and unto
mildness: and season a ’No’ with frowardnesse, with doubt and with favor; and require
not an interpreter in discourses made for their service. With this learning they command
without controule, and over-rule both Regents and Schooles. Yet if it offend them to yield
us any preheminence, and would for curiosity sake have part in bookes also: Poesie is a
study fit for their purpose, being a wanton, ammusing, subtill, disguised, and pratling
Arte; all in delight, all in show, like to them-selves. They may also select diverse
commodities out of History. In Morall Philosophy they may take the discourses which
enable them to judge of our humors, to censure our conditions, and to avoid our guiles
and treacheries; to temper the rashnesse of their own desires, to husband their liberty:
lengthen the delights of life, gently to bear the inconstancy of a servant, the peevishnesse
of rudenesse of a husband, the importunity of years, the unwelcomnesse of wrinkles, and
such like mind-troubling accidents. See here the most and greatest share of learning I
would assigne them. There are some particular, retired and close dispositions.
My essentiall form is fit for communication and proper for production: I am all
outward and in apparance; borne for society and unto friendship. The solitude I love and
commend is especially but to retire my affections and redeeme my thoughts unto my self
to restraine and close up, not my steppes, but my desires and my cares, resigning all
forraigne solicitude and trouble, and mortally shunning all manner of servitude and
obligation; and not so much the throng of men as the importunity of affairs. Locall
solitarinesse (to say trueth) does rather extend and enlarge me outwardly; I give my self
to State-business and to the world more willingly when I am all alone. At the court, and
in press of people, I close and slinke into my own skinne. Assemblies thrust me
again into my self. And I never entertaine my self so fondly, so licentiously, and so
particularly, as in places of respect and ceremonious discretion. Our follies make me not
laugh, but our wisdomes do. Of my own complexion, I am no enemy to the agitations
and stirrings of our Courts: I have there past great part of my life and am inured to be
merry in great assemblies so it be by intermission, and suitable to my humor.
But this tenderness and coinesse of judgement (whereof I speak) does perforce tie me
unto solitarinesse. Yea even in my own house, in the middest of a numerous family and
most frequented houses, I see people more then a good many, but seldom such as I love
to converse or communicate withall. And there I reserve, both for my self and others, an
unaccustomed liberty; making truce with ceremonies, assistance, and invitings, and such
other troublesome ordinances of our courtesys (O servile custom and importunate
manner) there every man demeaneth himself as he pleaseth, and entertaineth what his
thoughts affect: whereas I keep my self silent, meditating and close, without offence to
my guests or friends.
The men whose familiarity and society I hunt after, are those which are called honest,

vertuous, and sufficient: the image of whom does distaste and divert me from others. It is
(being rightly taken) the rarest of our formes; and a form or fashion chiefly due unto
nature. The end or scope of this commerce is principally and simply familiarity,
conference and frequentation: the exercise of mindes, without other fruite. In our
discourses all subjects are likewise to me: I care not though they want either waight or depth;
grace and pertinency are never wanting; all therein is tainted with a ripe and constant
judgement, and commixt with goodnesse, liberty, cheerefulnesse, and kindness. It is not
only in the subject of Laws and affairs of Princes, that our spirit sheweth its beauties
grace and vigor: It sheweth them as much in private conferences. I know my people by
their very silence and smyling, and perhaps discover them better at a Table then
sitting in serious counsell.
Hippomacus said, he discerned good Wrestlers but by seeing them march through a
Street. If learning vouchsafe to step into our talk, she shall not be refused; yet must not
she be stern, mastring, imperious and importunate, as commonly she is; but assistant
and docile of hirselfe. Therein we seek for nothing but recreation and pastime: when we
shall looke to be instructed, taught and resolved, we will go seek and sue to her in her
throne. Let her if she please keep from us at that time; for, as commodious and pleasing
as she is. I presume that for a neede we could spare her presence, and do our business
well enough without her. Wits well borne, soundly bred and exercised in the practise and
commerce of men, become gracious and plausible of themselves. Arte is but the Checke-
roule and Register of the Productions uttered and conceites produced by them.
The company of fair and society of honest women is likewise a sweet commerce for
me: Nam nos quoque oculos eruditos habemus: (Cic. Parad.) ’For we also have learned
eyes.’ If the mind have not so much to solace hirselfe as in the former, the corporall
sences, whose part is more in the second, bring it to a proportion near unto the other:
although in mine opinion not equall. But it is a society wherein it behooveth a man
somewhat to stand upon his guard: and especially those that are of a strong constitution,
and whose body can do much, as in me. In my youth I heated my self therein and was
very violent: and indured all the rages and furious assaults which Poets say happen to
those who, without order or discretion, abandon themselves over-loosly and riotously unto
it. True it is indeed, that the same lash has since stood me instead of an instruction.
Quicunque Argolico de classe Capharea fugit,
Semper ab Euboicis vela retorquet aquis. -- Ovid. Trist. i. El. 83.
Greeke Sailers that Capharean Rockes did fly
From the Euboean Seas their sailes still ply.
It is folly to fasten all ones thoughts upon it, and with a furious and indiscret affection to
engage himself unto it: But on the otherside, to meddle with it without love or bond of
affection, as Comedians do, to play a common part of age and manners, without ought of
their own but bare-conned words, is verily a provision for ones safety: and yet but a
cowardly one; as is that of him who would forgoe his honor, his profit or his pleasure, for

fear of danger; for it is certain that the practisers of such courses cannot hope for any
fruite able to moove or satisfie a worthy mind.
One must very earnestly have desired that whereof he would enjoy an absolute delight. I
meane, though fortune should unjustly favor their intention: which often happens,
because there is no woman, how deformed or unhandsome soever, but thinkes herself
lovely, amiable and praiseworthy, either for her age, her hair or gate (for there are
generally no more fair then foul ones): and the Brachmanian maides wanting other
commendations, by Proclamation for that purpose, made show of their matrimoniall parts
unto the people assembled, to see if thereby at least they might get them husbands. By
consequence there is not one of them, but upon the first oath one maketh to serve her, will
very easily be persuaded to think well of herself. Now this common treason and
ordinary protestations of men in these dayes must needs produce the effects experience
already discovereth: which is, that either they join together, and cast away themselves on
themselves to avoid us, or on their side follow also the example we give them; acting
their part of the play without passion, without care, and without love, lending themselves
to this enter course: Neque affectui suo, aut alieno obnoxiæ: ’Neither liable to their own
nor other folkes affection.’ Thinking, according to Lysias persuasions in Plato, they may
so much the more profitably and commodiously yield unto us, by how much less we love
them: Wherein it will happen as in Comedies, the spectators shall have as much or more
pleasure as the Comedians. For my part, I no more acknowledge Venus without Cupid,
then a mother-hood without an off-spring: They are things which enterlend and enter-owe
one another their essence. Thus does this cozening rebound on him that useth it, and as it
cost him little, so gets he not much by it. Those which made Venus a goddesse, have
respected that her principal beautie was incorporeall and spirituall. But she whom these
kind of people hunt after is not so much as humane, nor also brutal; but such as wild
beasts would not have her so filthy and terrestriall. We see that imagination enflames
them, and desire or lust urgeth them, before the body: We see in one and other sex, even
in whole heards, choise and distinctions in their affections, and amongst themselves,
acquaintances of long continued good-will and liking: And even those to whom age
denieth bodily strength, do yet bray, neigh, roare, skip and wince for love. Before the
deed we see them full of hope and heat; and when the body has plaid his part, even tickle
and tingle themselves with the sweetenesse of that remem brance: some of them swell
with pride at parting from it, others all weary and glutted, ring out songs of glee and
triumph. Who makes no more of it but to discharge his body of some natural necessitie,
has no cause to trouble others with so curious a preparation. It is no food for a greedy and
clownish hunger. As one that would not be accounted better than I am, thus much I will
display of my youths wanton-errors: Not only for the danger of ones health that followes
that game (yet could I not avoid two, although light and cursorie assaults) but also for
contempt, I have not much been given to mercenarie and common acquaintances. I have
coveted to set an edge on that sensuall pleasure by difficultie, by desire, and for some
glory. And liked Tiberius his fashions, who in his amours was swaied as much by modesty
and noblenesse as by any other quality. And Floras humor, who would Prostitute her
self to none worse then Dictators, Consuls, or Censors, and took delight in the dignitie

and greatness of her lovers, does somewhat sute with mine. Surely glittering pearles and
silken cloathes adde some-thing unto it, and so do titles, nobility and a worthie traine.
Besides which, I made high esteeme of the mind, yet so as the body might not justly be
found fault withall: For, to speak my conscience, if either of the two beauties were
necessarily to be wanting, I would rather have chosen to want the mentall, whose use is to
be emploied in better things. But in the subject of love, a subject that chiefly has
reference unto the two senses of seeing and touching, some thing may be done without the
graces of the mind, but little or nothing without the corporall. Beautie is the true
availefull advantage of women: It is so peculiarly theirs, that ours, though it require some
features and different allurements, is not in her right kue or true bias, unless confused
with theirs: childish and beardlesse. It is reported that such as serve the great Turke under
the title of beautie (whereof the number is infinite) are dismissed at furthest when they
once come to the age of two and twenty yeeres. Discourse, discretion, together with the
offices of true amitie, are better found amongst men: and therefore governe they the
worlds affairs. These two commerces or societies are accidentall and depending of
others; the one is troublesome and tedious for its raritie, the other withers with old age:
nor could they have sufficiently pro vided for my lives necessities. That of bookes, which
is the third, is much more solid-sure and much more ours, some other advantages it
yieldeth to the two former, but has for her share constancy and the facilite of her service.
This accosteth and secondeth all my course, and every where assisteth me: It comforts me
in age and solaceth me in solitarinesse; It easeth me of the burden of a weary-some sloth
and at all times rids me of tedious companies: it abateth the edge of fretting sorrow, on
condition it be not extreme and over-insolent. To divert me from any importunate
imagination or insinuating conceit, there is no better way then to have recourse unto
books; with ease they allure me to them, and with facility they remoove them all. And
though they perceive I neither frequent nor seek them, but wanting other more essential,
lively, and more natural commodities, they never mutiny or murmur at me; but still
entertaine me with one and self-same visage. He may well walke a foote that leades his
horse by the bridle, says the proverbe. And our James king of Naples and Sicili, being
fair, young, healthy and in good plight, caused himself to be caried abroad in a plaine
wagon or skreene, lying upon an homely pillow of course feathers, cloathed in a sute of
home spunne gray, and a bonet of the same, yet royally attended on by a gallant troupe of
Nobles, of Litters, Coches, and of all sorts of choice led-horses, a number of gentlemen
and officers, represented a tender and wavering austerity. The sicke man is not to be
moaned that has his health in his sleeve. In the experience and use of this sentence,
which is most true, consisteth all the commoditie I reape of bookes. In effect I make no
other use of them then those who know them not. I enjoy them, as a miser does his gold;
to know that I may enjoy them when I list, my mind is setled and satisfied with the right
of possession. I never travel without bookes, nor in peace nor in war: yet do I pass
many dayes and moneths without using them. It shall be anon, say I, or to-morrow, or
when I please; in the meane while the time runnes away, and passeth without hurting me.
For it is wonderful what repose I take, and how I continue in this consideration, that they
are at my elbow to delight me when time shall serve; and in acknowledging what

assistance they give unto my life. This is the best munition I have found in this humane
peregrination, and I extremely bewaile those men of understanding that want the same. I
accept with better will all other kindes of ammusements, how slight soever, forasmuch as
this cannot faile me. At home I betake me somewhat the oftner to my library, whence all
at once I command and survey all my houshold. It is seated in the chief entrie of my
house, thence I behold under me my garden, my base court, my yard, and looke even into
most roomes of my house. There without order, without method, and by peece-meales I
turn over and ransacke, now one book and now another. Sometimes I muse and rave;
and walking up and down I endight and enregister these my humors, these my conceits.
It is placed on the third story of a tower. The lowermost is my Chapell; the second a
chamber with other lodgings, where I often lie, because I would be alone. Above it is a
great ward-robe. It was in times past the most unprofitable place of all my house. There I
pass the greatest pa t of my lives dayes, and weare out most hours of the day. I am never
there a nights. Next unto it is a handsome neat cabinet, able and large enough to receive
fire in winter, and very pleasantly windowen. And if I feared not care more then cost (care
which drives and diverts me from all business), I might easily join a convenient gallerie
of a hundred paces long and twelve broad on each side of it, and upon one floore; having
already, for some other purpose, found all the walles raised unto a convenient height. Each
retired place requireth a walke. My thoughts are prone to sleepe if I sit long. My mind
goes not alone, as if [legs] did moove it. Those that studie without bookes are all in the
same case. The form of it is round, and has no flat side, but what serveth for my table
and chaire: In which bending or circling manner, at one looke it offereth me the full sight
of all my books, set round about upon shelves or desks, five rancks one upon another. It
has three bay-windowes of a far-extending, rich and unresisted prospect, and is in
diameter sixteene paces void. In winter I am less continually there: for my house (as the
name of it importeth) is pearched upon an over-pearing hillocke; and has no part more
subject to all wethers then this: which pleaseth me the more, both because the accesse
unto it is somwhat troublesome and remote, and for the benefit of the exercise which is to
be respected; and that I may the better seclude my self from companies and keep
incrochers from me: There is my seat, that is my throne. I endeavor to make my rule
therein absolute, and to sequester that only corner from the communitie of wife, of
children and of acquaintance. Else-where I have but a verball authority, of confused
essence. Miserable in my mind is he who in his own home has no where to be to
himself; where he may particularly court, and at his pleasure hide or withdraw self.
Ambition paieth h r followers well to keep them still in open view, as a statue in some
conspicuous place. Magna servitus est magna fortuna: (Sen. Cons. ad Pol. c. xxvi. p.) ’A
great fortune is a great bondage.’ They cannot be private so much as at their privie. I
have deemed nothing so rude in the austerity of the life which our Church-men affect as
that in some of their companies they institute a perpetuall societie of place, and a
numerous assistance amongst them in anything they do. And deem it somewhat more
tolerable to be ever alone, then never be able to be so. If any say to me, It is a kind of
vilifying the Muses to use them only for sport and recreation, he wots not as I do, what
worth, pleasure, sport and pass-time is of: I had well nigh termed all other ends

rediculous. I live from hand to mouth, and, with reverence be it spoken, I live but to my
self: there end all my designes. Being young I studied for ostentation ; then a little to
enable my self and become wiser; now for delight and recreation, never for gain. A
vain conceit and lavish humor I had after this kind of stuffe; not only to provide for my
need, but somewhat further to adorn and embellish my self withall: I have since partlie
left it. Bookes have and containe diverse pleasing qualities to those that can duly choose
them. But no good without paines; no Roses with out prickles. It is a pleasure not
absolutely pure and neate; no more then all others; it has his inconveniences attending on
it, and sometimes waighty ones: The mind is the rein exercised, but the body (the care
whereof I have not yet forgotten) remaineth there-whilst without action, and is wasted,
and ensorrowed. I know no excess more hurtful for me, nor more to be avoided by me,
in this declining age. See here my three most favoured and particular employments. I
speak not of those I owe of dutie to the world.



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER IV: OF DIVERTING AND DIVERSIONS






CHAPTER IV: OF DIVERTING AND DIVERSIONS
WAS once employed in comforting of a truely-afflicted Lady: the
greatest part of their discourses are artificial and ceremonious.
Uberibus semper lachrimis, semperque paratis,
In statione sua, atque expectantibus illam
Quo jubeat manare modo. -- Juven. Sat. vi. 273.
With plenteous tears; still readie in their stand,
Expecting still their Mistresses commaund,
How they must flow, when they must go.
Men do but ill in opposing themselves against this passion; for opposition does but

incense and engage them more to sorrow and quietnesse: The disease is exasperated by
the jealousie of debate. In matters of common discourse we see that what I have spoken
without heede or care, if one come to contest with me about it, I stifly maintaine and make
good my own, much more if it be a thing wherein I am interessed. Besides, in so
dooing you enter but rudely into your matter, whereas a physicians first entertainment of
his patient should be gracious, cheereful, and pleasing. An uglie and froward Physition
wrought never any good effect. On the contrary then, we must at first assist and smoothe
their laments, and witness some approbation and excuse thereof. By which means you
get credit to go on, and by an easy and insensible inclination you fall into more firme and
serious discourses and fit for their amendment. But I, who desired chiefly to gull the
assistants, that had their eyes cast on me, meant to salve their mischief: I verily find by
experience that I have but an ill and unfruitfull vain to persuade. I present my reasons
either too sharpe, or too drie, or too stirringly, or too carelesly. After I had for a while
applyed myself to her torment, I attempted not to cure it by strong and lively reasons:
either because I want them, or because I suppose I might otherwise effect my purpose the
better. Nor did I cull out the severall fashions of comfort prescribed by philosophy: That
the thing lamented is not ill, as Cleanthes: or but a little ill, as the Peripatetikes: that to
lament is neither just nor commendable, as Chrysippus: Nor this Epicurus, most agreeing
with my manner, to translate the conceit of yrkesome into delightsome things: Nor to
make a loade of all this masse, dispensing the same, as one has occasion, as Cicero. But
fair and softly declining our discourses, and by degrees bending them unto subjects more
neare, then a little more remote, even as she more or less enclined to me. I
unperceivably remooved those dolefull humors from her: so that as long as I was with
her, so long I kept her in cheerful countenance and untroubled fashion, wherein I used
diversion. Those which in the same service succeeded me, found her no whit amended;
the reason was, I had not yet driven my wedge to the roote. I have perhaps else
where glaunced at some kindes of public diversions. And the militairie customs used by
Pericles in the Peloponesian war, and a thousand others else where, to divert or
withdrawe the army of an enemy from their own country, is too frequent in histories. It
was an ingenious diverting wherewith the Lord of Himbercourt saved both himself and
others in the town of Liege, into which the Duke of Burgondie, who beleagred the same,
had caused him to enter, to performe the covenante of their accorded yielding. The
inhabitants thereof, to provide for it, assembled by night, and began to mutiny against
their former agreement, determining upon this advantage to set upon the Negotiators, now
in their power. He perceiving their intent, and noise of this shoure readie to fall upon
him, and the danger his lodging was in, forth-with rushed out upon them two cittizens
(whereof he had diverse with him furnished with most plausible and new offers to be
propounded to their counsell but indeed forged at that instant to serve his turn withall,
and to ammuse them. These two stayes the first approaching storme, and carryed this
incensed Hydra-headed-monster multitude backe to the townehouse, to hear their charge,
and accordingly to determine of it. The conclusion was short, when lo a second tempest
came rushing on, more furiously inraged then the former; to whom he immediately
dispatched foure new and semblable intercessors, with protestations that now they were in

earnest to propose and declare new and far more ample conditions unto them, wholly to
their content and satisfaction; whereby this disordered rout was again drawne to their
Conclave and senate-house. In summe, he by such a dispensation of amusements,
diverting their headlong fury, and dissipating the same with vain and frivolous
consultations, at length lulled them into so secure a sleep, that he gained the day, which
was his chiefest drift and only aymed scope. This other story is also of the same
predicament. Atalanta, a maid of rare surpassing beautie and of a wondrous strange
disposition, to ridde herself from the importunate pursuit of a thousand amorous sutors,
who sollicited her for mariage prescribed this law unto them, that she would accept of him
that should equall her in running; on condition those she shold overcome might lose their
lives. Some there were found who deemed this prize worthie the hazard, and who incurred
the penaltie of so cruel a match. Hippomenes coming to make his assay after the rest,
addressed himself to the divine protectress of all amorous delights, earnestly invoking her
assistance, who gently listening to his hearty prayers, furnished him with three golden
Apples, and taught him how to use them. The scope of the race being plaine, according as
Hippomenes perceived his swift-footed mistresse to approch his heels, he let fall (as at
unawares) one of his Apples: the heedlesse maiden gazing and wondring at the alluring
beautie of it, failed not to turn and take it up.
Obstupuit virgo, nitidique cupidine pomi,
Dectinat cursus, aurumque volubile tollit. -- Ovid. Met. x. 666.
The maid amaz’d, desiring that fair gold,
Turnes by her course, takes it up as it rold.
The like he did (at his need) with the second and third, until by this disgressing and
diverting, the goale and advantage of the course was judged his. When Physitians cannot
purge the rheume, they divert and remoove the same unto some less dangerous part. I
also perceive it to be the most ordinary receit for the mindes diseases. Ab ducendus etiam
nonnunquam animus est ad aliena studia, sollicitudines, curas negotia: Loci denique
mutatione, tanquam ægroti non convalescentes, sæpe curandus est: ’Our mind also is
sometimes to be diverted to other studies, cogitations, cares, and businesses: and lastly to
be cured by chance of place, as sicke folkes use that otherwise cannot get health.’ We
make it seldom to shocke mischiefes with direct resistance; we make it neither to bear
nor to break, but to shun or divert the blow. This other lesson is too high and over-hard. It
is for him of the first rank meerely to staye upon the thing itself, to examine and judge
it. It belongth to one only Socrates, to accost and entertaine death with an undaunted
ordinary visage, to become familiar and play with it. He seeketh for no comfort out of this
thing itself. To die seems unto him a natural and indifferent accident: thereon be
wishly fixeth his right, and thereon he resolveth without looking else where. Hegesias his
disciples, who with hunger starv’d themselves to death, incensed thereunto with the
perswading discourses of his lessons; and that so thicke as King Ptolomey forbad him any
longer to entertaine his schoole with such murtherous precepts. Those considered not

death in itself they judged it not: This was not the limit of their thoughts, they run on,
and ayme at another being. Those poore creatures we see on scaffolds, fraught with an
ardent devotion, therein to the uttermost of their power, employing al their sences; their
ears attentive to such instructions as Preachers give them, their hands and eyes lift up
towards heaven; their voice uttering loud and earnest praiers: all with an eager and
continuall ruth-mooving motion; do verily what in such an unavoydable exigent is
commendable and convenient. One may well commend their religion, but not properly
their constancy. They shunne the brunt, they divert their consideration from death; as we
use to dandle and busie children, when we would lance them or let them blood. I have
seen some, who if by fortune they chanced to cast their eyes towards the dreadful
preparations of death which were round about them, fal into trances, and with fury cast
their cogitations else where. We teech those that are to pass over some steep downefall
or dreadfull abisse, to shut or turn aside their eyes. Subrius Flavius, being by the
appointment of Nero to be put to death by the hands of Niger, both chief commanders in
war: when he was brought unto the place where the execution should be performed, seeing
the pit Niger had caused to be digged for him uneven and unhandsomely made: "Nor is
this pit (quoth he to the soldiers that stood about him) according to the true discipline of
war’: and to Niger, who willed him to hold his head steddy, ’I wish you would stricke
as steddily.’ He guessed right; for Nigers arm trembling, he had diverse blowes at him
before be could strike it off. This man seemed to have fixed his thoughts surely and
directly on the matter. He that dies in the fury of a battle, with weapons in band, thinkes
not then on death, and neither feeleth nor considereth the same: the heate of the fight
transports him. An honest man of my acquaintance, falling down in a single combate,
and feeling himself stab’d nine or ten times by his enemy, was called unto by the by
standers to call on God and remember his conscience: but he told me after, that albeit
those voices came unto his ears, they had no whit mooved him, and that he thought on
nothing but how to discharge and revenge himself. In which combat he vanquished and
slew his adversary. He who brought L. Syllanus his condemnation, did much for him, in
that when he heard him answer he was prepared to die, but not by the hands of base
villaines, ran upon him with his soldiers to force him; against whom obstinately
defending himself, though unarmed, with fists and feet, he was slain in the conflict;
dispercing with a ready and rebellious choller the painefull sence of a long and fore-
prepared death to which he was assigned. We ever think on somewhat else: either the
hope of a better life does settle and support us, or the confidence of our childrens worth, or
the future glory of our name, or the avoyding of this lives mischieves, or the revenge
banging over their heads that have caused and procured our death:
Spero equidem mediis, si quid pia numina possunt,
Supplcia hausurum scopulis, et nomine Dido
Sæpe vocaturum.
-- Virg. Æn. iv. 382.
Audiam, et hæc manes veniet mihi fama sub imos. --387.
I hope, if powers of heaven have any power,

On rockes he shall be punisht, at that hour
He oft on Didoes name shall pittilesse exclaime,
This shall I hear, and this report, shall to me in my grave resort.
Xenophon sacrificed with a crowne on his head, when one came to tell him the death of
his son Gryllus in the battle of Mantinea. At the first hearing whereof he cast his
crowne to the ground, but finding upon better relation how valiantly he died, he took it
up and put it on his head again. Epicurus also at his death comforted himself in the
eternitie and worth of his writings. Omnes clari et nobilitati labores fiunt tolerabiles: (Cic.
Tusc. iii.) ’All glorious and honorable labours are made tolerable.’ And the same wound
and the same toile (says Xenophon) toucheth not a General of an army as it does a
private souldier. Epaminondas took his death much the more cheerfully, being informed
that the victory remained on his side. Hæc sunt solatia, hæc fomenta summorum dolorum:
(Ibid.) ’These are the comforts, these the eases of most grievous paines.’ And such other
like circumstances ammuse, divert and remoove us from the consideration of the thing in
itself. Even the arguments of Philosophie, at each clappe wrest and turn the matter
aside, and scarcely wipe away the scabbe thereof. The first man of the first Philosophicall
School and Superintendent of the rest, that great Zeno, against death cried out: ’No evil is
honorable; death is: therefore is death no evil.’ Against drunkennesse: ’No man entrusts
his secrets to a drunkard; every one to the wise: therefore the wise will not be drunke.’ Is
this to hit the white? I love to see that these principal wits cannot rid themselves of our
company. As perfect and absolute as they would be, they are still but grosse and simple
men. Revenge is a sweet-pleasing passion, of a great and natural impression: I perceive
it well, albeit I have made no trial of it. To divert of late a young prince from it, I told him
not, he was to offer the one side of his cheeke to him who had strooke him on the other, in
regard of charity; nor displaid I unto him the tragical events Poesie bestoweth upon that
passion. There I left him, and strove to make him taste the beautie of a contrary image; the
honor, the favor and the good-will he should acquire by gentlenesse and goodnesse: I
diverted him to ambition. Behold how they deale in such cases. If your affection in love
be over-powerfull, disperse or dissipate the same, say they; and they say true, for I have
often, with profit, made trial of it: Breake it by the virtue of severall desires, of which
one may be Regent or chief Master, if you please; but for fear it should misuse or
tyrannize you, weaken it with dividing, and protract it with diverting the same.
Cum morosa vago singultiet inguine vena,
Conjicito humorem collectum in corpora quæque. -- Pers. Sat. vi. 73. Lucr.
iv. 1056.
When raging lust excites a panting tumor,
To diverse parts send that collected humor.
And looke to it in time, lest it vex you, if it have once seized on you.

Si non prima novis conturbes vulnera plagis,
Volgivagaque vagus Venere ante recentia cures. -- Lucr. iv. 1061.
Unless the first wounds with new wounds you mix,
And ranging cure the fresh with common tricks.
I was once neerely touched with a heavy displeasure, according to my complexion, and
yet more just then heavy: I had perhaps lost my self in it, had I only relied upon
my own strength. Needing a vehement diversion to withdraw me from it. I did by Arte
and studie make my self a Lover, whereto my age assisted me; love discharged and
diverted me from the inconvenience which good-wil and amitie had caused in me. So is it
in all things else. A sharpe conceit possesseth, and a violent imagination holdeth me; I
find it a shorter course to alter and divert, then to tame and vanquish the same: if I cannot
substitute a contrary unto it, at least I present another unto it. Change ever easeth, Varietie
dissolveth, and shifting dissipateth. If I cannot buckle with it, I flie from it: and in
shunning it, I stray and double from it. Shifting of place, exercise and company, I save my
self amid the throng of other studies and ammusements, where it loses my tracke, and so
I slip away. Nature proceedeth thus, by the benefit of inconstancy: for the time it has
bestowed on us, as a sovereigns physition of our passions chiefly obtaines his purpose that
way, when fraughting our conceits with other and different affairs, it dissolveth and
corrupteth that first apprehension, how forcible soever it be. A wise man seeth little less
his friend dying at the end of five and twenty yeeres, then at the beginning of the first
yeere; and according to Epicurus, nothing less: for he asscribed no qualification of
perplexities, either to the foresight or antiquitie of them. But so many other cogitations
crosse this that it languisheth, and in the end groweth weary. To divert the inclination of
vulgar reports, Alcibiades cut off his fair dogs ears, and so drove him into the market
place; that giving this subject of prattle to the people, they might not meddle with his other
actions. I have also seen some women, who to divert the opinions and conjectures of the
babling people, and to divert the foolish tatling of some, did by counterfet and dissembled
affections overshadow and cloak true affections. Amongst which I have noted some, who
in dissembling and counterfeiting have suffered themselves to be intrapped wittingly and
in good earnest; quitting their true and originall humor for the feigned: of whom I learne
that such as find themselves well seated are very fooles to yielde unto that maske. The
common greetings, and public entertainements being reserved unto that set or appointed
servant, believe there is little sufficiency in him, if in the end he usurpe not your roome
and send you unto his. This is properly to cut out and stitch up a shoe for another to put
on. A little thing does divert and turn us; for a small thing holds us. We do not much
respect subjects in grosse and alone: they are circumstances, or small and superficiall
images that moove and touch us; and vain rindes which rebound from subjects.
Folliculos ut nunc teretes æstate cicadas
Linquunt. -- Lucr. v. 812.

As grasse-hoppers in summer now forsake
The round-grown sheafes, which they in time should take.
Plutarke himself bewailes his daughter by the fopperies of his childehood. The
remembrance of a farewell, of an action, of a particular grace, or of a last commendation,
afflict us. Cæsars gowne disquieted all Rome, which his death had not done: The very
sound of names, which gingleth in our ears, as, ’Oh, my poore master; or ’Alas, my dear
friend;’ ’Oh, my daughter.’ When such like repetitions pinch me, and that I looke more
nearely to them, I find them but grammaticall laments, the word and the tune wound me.
Even as Preachers exclamations do often move their auditory more then their reasons: and
as the pitiful groan of a beast yerneth us though it be killed for our use: poising or
entring there-while into the true and massie essence of my subject.
His se stimulis dolor ipse lacessit. -- Lucan. ii. 42.
Griefe by these provocations,
Puts itself in more passions.
They are the foundations of our mourning. The conceipt of the stone,
namely in the yard, has sometime for three or foure dayes together so
stopped my urine, and brought me so neare deaths-doore, that it had been
meere folly in me to hope, nay to desire, to avoyd the same, considering
what cruel pangs that painefull plight did seaze me with. Oh how cunning a
master in the murthering arte or hangmans trade was that good Emperor
who caused malefactors yards to be fast-tide, that so he might make them
dye for want of pissing. In which ill plight finding my self, I considered by
how slight causes and frivolous objects, imagination nourished in me the
grief to lose my life: with what atomes the consequence and difficulty of
my dislodging was contrived in my mind: to what idle conceits and
frivolous cogitations we give place in so waighty a case or important
affaire. A Dogge, a Horse, a Hare, a Glasse, and what not, were corrupted in
my loss. To others, their ambitious hopes, their purse, their learning: In my
mind as sottishly. I view death carelessely when I behould it universally as
the end of life. I overwhelme and contemne it thus in great, by retayle it
spoiles and proules me. The tears of a Lacquey, the distributing of my cast
sutes, the touch of a known hand, an ordinary consolation, does
disconsolate and intender me. So do the plaints and fables of trouble vex our
mindes: and the wailing laments of Dydo and Ariadne passionate even those
that believe them not in Virgill nor in Catullus: It is an argument of an
obstinate nature and indurate hart, not to be moved therewith: as for a
wonder, they report of Polemon: who was not so much as appaled at the
biting of a Dog, who took away the braun or calfe of his leg. And no
wisdom goeth so far, as by the due judgement to conceive aright the

evident cause of a Sorrow and grief, so lively and wholly, that it suffer or
admit no accession by presence, when eyes and ears have their share
therein: parts that cannot be agitated but by vain accidents. Is it reason that
even arts should serve their purposes, and make their profit of our
imbecillity and natural blockishnes? An Orator (says Rhetorick) in the play
of his pleading, shall be moved at the sound of his own voice, and by his
feigned agitations: and suffer himself to be cozoned by the passion he
representeth: imprinting a lively and essentiall sorrow, by the jugling he
acteth, to transferre it into the judges, whom of the two it concerneth less:
As the persons hired at our funerals who to aide the ceremony of mourning
make sale of their tears by measure, and of their sorrow by waight. For
although they strive to act it in a borrowed form, yet by habituating and
ordering their countenance, it is certain they are often wholly transported
into it, and entertaine the impression of a true and untamed melancholly. I
assisted, amongst diverse others of his friends, to convay the dead corpse of
the Lord of Grammont from the siege of Laffere, where he was untimely
slain, to Soissons. I noted that every where as we passed along we filled
with lamentation and tears all the people we met, by the only show of our
convoies mourning attire; for the deceased mans name was not so much as
known or heard of about those quarters. Quintilian reporteth to have seen
Comedians so far ingaged in a sorrowfull part, that they wept after being
come to their lodgings: and of himself, that having undertaken to move a
certain passion in another, he had found himself surprised not only with
shedding of tears, but with a palenesse of countenance, and behaviour of a
man truly dejected with grief. In a country neare our Mountaines the
women say and unsay, weepe and laugh with one breath, as Martin the
Priest; for, as for their lost husbands, they encrease their waymentings by
repeti tion of the good and gracefull parts they were endowed with, there
withall under one they make public relation of those imperfections, to
work, as it were, some recompence unto themselves and transchange their
pity unto disdaine; with a much better grace then we, who when we loose a
late acquaintance, strive to loade him with new and forged prayses, and to
make him far other, now that we are deprived of his sight, then he
seemed to be when we enjoied and beheld him; as if mourning were an
instructing party, or tears cleared our understanding by washing the same. I
renounce from this time forward all the favourable testimonies any man
shall affoord me, not because I shall deserve them, but because I shall be
dead. If one demand that fellow, what interest he has in such a siege; The
interest of example (will he say) and common obedience of the Prince; I nor
looke nor pretend any benefit thereby, and of glory I know how small a
portion commeth to the share of a private man such as I am. I have neither
passion nor quarrell in the matter. Yet the next day shall you see him all
changed, and chafing, boiling, and blushing with rage in his rank of

battaile, ready for the assault. It is the glaring reflecting of so much steele,
the flashing thundering of the Canon, the clang of trumpets, and the ratling
of Drummes, that have infused this new fury, and rankor in his swelling
vaines. A frivolous cause, will you say. How a cause? There needeth none
to excite our mind. A doating humor without body, without substance,
overswayeth and tosseth it up and down. Let me think of building Castles
in Spayne, my imagination will forge me commodities and afford me
means and delights wherewith my mind is really tickled and essentially
gladded. How often do we pester our spirits with anger or sadnesse by such
shaddowes, and entangle ourselves into fantastic passions which alter
both our mind and body? What astonished, flearing, and confused mumpes
and mowes does this dotage stir up in our visages? what skippings and
agitations of members and voice, seems it not by this man alone, that he
has false visions of a multitude of other men with whom he does negotiate;
or some inwarde Goblin that torments him? Enquire of your self where is
the object of this alteration? Is there any thing but us in nature, except
subsisting nullity, over whom it has any power? Because Cambyses
dreamed that his brother should be King of Persia, he put him to death: a
brother whom be loved and ever trusted. Aristodemus, King of the
Messenians, killed himself upon a conceite he took of some ill presage,
by I know not what howling of his Dogs. And King Midas did as much,
being troubled and vexed by a certain unpleasing dreame of his own. It is
the right way to prize ones life at the right worth of it to forgo it for a
dreame. Here notwithstanding our mindes triumph over the bodies
weakenesses and misery: in that it is the prey and marke of all wrongs and
alterations to feede on and aime at. It has surely much reason to speak of it.
O prima infoelix fingenti terra Prometheo:
Ille parum cauti pectoris egit opus.
Corpora disponens, mentem non vidit in arte:
Recta animi primum debuit esse via. -- Prop. iii. El. iv. 7.
Unhappy earth first by Prometheus formed,
Who of small providence a work performed.
He framing bodies saw in arte no mind:
The mindes way first should rightly be assign’d.




Return to

: Book III
CHAPTER V: UPON SOME VERSES OF VIRGIL






CHAPTER V: UPON SOME VERSES OF VIRGIL
ROFITABLE thoughts, the more full and solid they are, the more
combersome and heavy are they; vice, death, poverty, and diseases, are
subjects that waigh and grieve. We must have our mind instructed with
means to sustain and combate mischiefes, and furnished with rules
how to live well and believe right: and often rouze and exercise it in
this goodly study. But to a mind of the common stampe it must be with
intermission and moderation; it groweth weake by being continually over-wrested. When I
was young I had neede to be advertised and sollicited to keep my self in office: Mirth
and health (saies one) sute not so well with these serious and grave discourses. I am now
in another state. The conditions of age do but over-much admonish, instruct, and preach
unto me. From the excess of jollity, I am falne into the extreme of severity: more
peevish and more untoward. Therefore, I do now of purpose somewhat give way unto
licentious allurements; and now and then employ my mind in wanton and youthfull
conceits, wherein she recreates herself. I am now but too much setled; too heavy and too

ripe. My years read me daily a lesson of coldnesse and temperance. My body shunneth
disorder and feares it: it has his turn to direct the mind toward reformation; his turn
also to rule and sway; and that more rudely and imperiously. Be I awake or a sleepe, it
does not permit me one hou re but to ruminate on instruction, on death, on patience, and
on repentance. As I have heretofore defended my self from pleasure, so I now ward my
self from temperance: it haleth me too far back, and even to stupidity. I will now every
way be master of my self. Wisdome has her excesses, and no less need of moderation
then folly.So that least I should wither, I varnish and over cloy my self with prudence, in
the intermissions my evils afoord me;
Mens intenta suis ne siet: usque malis. Ovid. Trist. iv. El. i. 4.
Still let not the conceit attend,
The ils that it too much offend.
I gently turn aside, and steale mine eyes from viewing that tempestuous and cloudy
skie I have before me; which (thankes be to God) I consider without fear, but not without
contention and study. And ammuse my self with the remembrance of past youth-tricks:
-----animus quod perdidit, optat,
Atque in præterita se totas imagine versat. -- Petron. Arb. Sat.
The mind, what it has lost, does wish and cast,
And turn and winde in Images forepast.
That infancy looketh forward, and age backward was it not that which Janus his double
visage signified? years entrains me if they please: but backward. As far as mine eyes can
discerne that fair expired season, by fits I turn them thitherward. If it escape my blood
and veines, yet will I not roote the image of it out of my memory:
------ hoc est,
Vivere bis, vita posse priore frui. -- Mart. x. Epig. xxiii. 7.
This is the way for any to live twise,
Who can of former life enjoy the price.
Plato appoints old men to be present at youthfull exercises, dances, and games, to make
them rejoice at the bodies agility and comlinesse of others, which is now no longer in
them, and call to their remembrance the grace and favor of that blooming age; and
wills them to give the honor of the victory to that young-man who has gladded and
made most of them mery. I was heretofore wont to note sullen and gloomy days as
extraordinary: now are they my ordinary ones: the extraordinary are my fair and clear

dayes. I am ready to leape for joy, as at the receaving of some unexpected favor, when
nothing grieveth me. Let me tickle my self, I can now hardly wrest a bare smile from this
wretched body of mine. I am not pleased but in conceite an dreaming, by sleight to turn
aside the way-ward cares of age: but sure there is need of other remedies then dreaming. A
weake contention of arte against nature. It is meere simplicity, as most men do, to prolong
and anticipate humane incommodities. I had rather be less while olde, then old before my
time. I take hold even of the least occasions of relight I can meet withall. I know now by
hear-say diverse kindes of wise, powerfull and glorious pleasures: but opinion is not of
sufficient force over me to make me long for them. I would not have them so stately,
lofty, and disdainfully as pleasant, gentle, and ready. A natura discedimus; populo nos
damus, nullius rei bono auctori: (Sen. Ep. xcix.) ’We forsake nature; We follow the
people author of no good.’ My Philosophy is in action, in natural and present, little in
conceit. What if I should be pleased to play at cob-nut or whip a top?
Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem. -- Ennius.
He did not prize what might be said,
Before how all might safe be laid.
Voluptuousnesse is a quality little ambitious; it holds itself rich enough of itself
without any accesse of reputation; and is best affected where it is most obscured. That
young man should deserve the whip who would spend his time in choosing out the neatest
Wine and best sauces. There is nothing I ever knew or esteemed less: I now beginne to
learne it. I am much ashamed of it, but what can I do with all? and am more ashamed and
vexed at the occasions that compell me to it. It is for us to dally, doate, and trifle out the
time; and for youth to stand upon nice reputation, and hold by the better end of the staffe.
That creepeth towards the world and marcheth toward credite; we come from it. Sibi
arma, sibi equos, sibi hastas, sibi clavam, sibe pilam, sibi nationes et cursus habeant:
nobis senibus, ex lusionibus multis, talos relinquant, et tesseras: (Cic. De Sene.) ’Let them
keeps their armor, their horses, their lances, their polaxes, their tennis, their swimming,
and their running; and of their many games, let them put over to us old men the tables and
the cards." The very laws send us home to our lodgings. I can do no less in favor of
this wretched condition, whereto my age forceth me, then furnish it with somewhat to
dandle and ammuse itself, as it were childehood, for when all is done we fall into it
again. And both wisdom and folly shall have much a do, by enterchange of offices to
support and succour me in this calamity of age.
Misce stultitiam conciliis brevem. -- Hor. iv. Od. xii. 27.
With short-like-foolish tricks,
Thy gravest counsels mixe.

Withal I shun the lightest pricklings; and those which heretofore could not have scratcht
me, do now transpearce me. So wilingly my habite does now begin to apply itself to evil;
in fragili corpore odiosa omnis offensio est: (Cic. De Sene.) ’all offence is yrkesome to a
crased body.’
Mensque pati durum sustinet ægra nihil. -- Ovid.Pont. i. El. vi. 18.
A sicke mind can endure,
No hard thing for her cure.
I have ever been ticklish and nice in matters of offence; at this present I am more
tender and every where open.
Et minimæ vires frangere quassa valent. -- Ovid. Trist. iii. El. xi. 22.
Least strength can breake
Things worne and weake.
Well may my judgement hinder me from spurning and repining at the inconveniences
which nature allots me to endure: from feeling them it cannot. I could find in my heart to
run from one ende of the world to another, to searche and purchase one yeare of
pleasing and absolute tranquillity; I who have no other scope then to live and be mery.
Drouzie and stupide tranquillity is sufficiently to be found for me, but it makes me drouzy
and dizzie, therefore I am not pleased with it. If there be any body or any good company
in the country, in the citty, in France, or any where els, resident, travelling, that likes of
my conceites, or whose humors are pleasing to me, they neede but hold up their hand, or
whistle in their fiste, and I will store them with Essayes of pithe and substance, with might
and main. Seeing it is the mindes priviledge to renew and recover itself on old age, I
earnestly advise it to do it; let it bud, blossome, and flourish if it can as Misle-toe on a
dead tree. I fear it is a traitor; so straightly is she clasped, and so hard does she cling to
my body, that every hand-while she forsakes me; to follow her in her necessities. I flatter
her in private, I urge her to no purpose, in vain I offer to divert her from this combination,
and bootlesse it is for me to present her Seneca, or Catullus, or Ladies, or stately dances: if
her companion have the chollicke, it seems she also has it. The very powers or faculties
that are particular and proper to her, cannot then rouze themselves: they evidently seem to
be enrheumed: there is no blithnes in her productions, if there be none in the body. Our
schollers are to blame, who serching the causes of our mindes extraordinary fits and
motions, besides they ascribe some to a divine fury, to love, to war-like fiercenesse, to
Poesie, and to Wine, if they have not also allotted health her share: a health, youthfull,
lusty, vigorous, full, idle, such as heretofore the Aprill of my years and security offered
me by fittes. That fire of jocondnesse stirreth up lively and bright sparkles in our mind
beyond our natural brightnesse and amongst the most working, if not the most desperate

Enthusiasmes or inspirations. Well, it is no wonder if a contrary estate clogge and naile
my spirit, and drawe from it a contrary effect.
Ad nullum consurgit opus, cum corpore languet. -- Cor. Gal. El. i. 125.
It to no work does rise,
When body fainting lyes.
And yet would have me beholden to him for lending (as he sayth) much less to this
consent then beareth the ordinary custom of men. Let us at least, whilst we have time,
chase and expell all difficulties from our society.
Dum licet obducta solvatur fronte senectus; -- Hor. Epod. xiii. 7.
With wrinckled wimpled forhead let old years,
While we may, be resolv’d to merrie cheere.
Tetrica sunt amænanda jocularibus: ’Unpleasant things and sowre matters should be
sweetned and made pleasant with sportefull mixtures.’ I love a lightsome and civill
discretion, and loathe a roughnes and austerity of behaviour: suspecting every peevish and
way ward countenance.
Tristemque vultus tetrici arrogantiam. -- Mart. vii. Epig. lvii. 9.
Of austere countenance,
The sad soure arrogance.
Et habet tristis quoque turba cynædos.
Fidlers are often had,
Mongst people that are sad.
I easily believe Plato, who saieth that easy or hard humors are a great prejudice unto
the mindes goodnesse or badnesse. Socrates had a constant countenance, but light-some
and smyling; not frowardly constant, as old Crassus, who was never seen to laugh.
Vertue is a pleasant and buxom quality. Few I know will snarle at the liberty of my
writings, that have not more cause to snarle at their thoughts-loosenes. I conforme my-
self unto their courage, but I offend their eyes. It is a well ordered humor to wrest Platos
writings and strain his pretended negotiations with Phedon, Dion, Stella, Archeanassa.
Non pudeat dicere, quod non pudeat sentire. ’Let us not be ashamed to speak what we
shame not to think.’ I hate a way ward and sad disposition, that glided over the pleasures
of his life, and fastens and feedes on miseries. As flyes that cannot cleave to smooth and

sleeke bodies, but seaze and holde on rugged and uneven places; or as Cupping glasses,
that affect and suck none but the worst blood. For my part I am resolved to dare speak
whatsoever I dare do: And am displeased with thoughts not to be published. The worst of
my actions or condicions seem not so ugly unto me as I find it both ugly and base not to
dare to avouch them. Every one is wary in the confession; we should be as heedy in the
action. The bouldnes of offending is somewhat recompensed and restrained by the
bouldnes of confessing. He that should be bound to tell all, should also bind himself to do
nothing which one is forced to conceal. God graunt this excess of my licence draw men
to freedom, beyond these cowardly and squeamish vertues, sprung from our
imperfections; that by the expence of my immoderation I may reduce them unto reason.
One must survay his faultes and study them, ere he be able to repeat them. Those which
bide them from others, commonly conceal them also from themselves; and esteme them
not sufficiently hidden if themselves see them. They withdraw and disguise them from
their own consciences. Quare vicia confitetur? Quia etiam nunc in illis est, somnium
narrare vigilantes est: (SEN. Epist. 53 m.) ’Why does no man confesse his faults? Because
he is yet in them: and to declare his dreame, is for him that is waking.’ The bodies evils
are discerned by their increase. And now we find that to be the gout which we termed the
rheume or a bruse. The evils of the mind are darkened by their own force; the most
infected feeleth them least: Therefore is it that they must often a day be handled, and
violently be opened and rent from out the hollow of our bosome. As in the case of good,
so of bad offices, only confession is sometimes a satisfaction. Is there any deformity in the
error which dispenseth us to confesse the same? It is a pain for me to dissemble, so that I
refuse to take charge of other men’s secrets, as wanting hart to disavow my knowledge. I
can conceal it; but deny it I cannot, without much ado and some trouble. To be perfectly
secret, one must be so by nature, not by obligation. It is a small matter to be secret in the
Princes service, if one be not also a liar. He that demanded Thales Milesius, whether he
should solemnly deny his lechery; had he come to me, I would have answered him, he
ought not do it, for a ly is in mine opinion worse than lechery. Thales advised him
otherwise, bidding him sweare, thereby to warrant the more by the less. Yet was not his
counsell so much the election as multiplication of vice. Whereupon we sometimes use this
by-word, that we deale well with a man of conscience, when in counterpoise of vice we
propose some difficulty unto him: but when he is inclosed betweene two vices, he is put to
a hard choise. As Origen was dealt with al, either to commit idolatry, or suffer himself to
be Sodomatically abused by a filthy Egiptian slave that was presented unto him, he
yeilded to the first condition, and viciously, says one. Therefore should not those women
be distasted according to their error, who of late protest that they had rather charge their
conscience with ten men then one Masse. If it be indiscretion so to divulge ones errors,
ther is no danger though it come into example and use; for Ariston said, that ’The winds
men fear most are those which discover them.’ We must tuck up this homely rag that
cloaketh our manners. They send their conscience to the stews, and keep their
countenance in order. Even traitors and murtherers observe the laws of complements, and
thereto fix their endevors. So that neither can injustice complain of incivility nor malice
of indiscretion. Tis pity a bad man is not also a foole, and that decency should cloak his

vice. These pargettings belong only to good and sound wals, such as deserve to be whited,
to be preserved. In favor of Hugonots, who accuse our auricular and private confession, I
confesse my self in public, religiously and purely. Saint Augustine, Origine, and
Hippocrates have published their errors of their opinions; I likewise of my maners. I
greedily long to make my self known, nor care I at what rate, so it be truly; or, to say
better, I hunger for nothing; but I hate mortally to be mistaken by such as shall happen to
know my name. He that does all for honor and glory, what thinks he to gain by
presenting himself to the world in a maske, hiding his true being from the peoples
knowledge? Commend a crook-back for his comely stature, he ought to take it as an
injury: if you be a coward, and one honoreth you for a valiant man, is it of you he
speaks? you are taken for another: I should like as well to have him glory in the
courtesys and lowtings that are showed him, supposing himself to be ring-leader of a
troupe when he is the meanest folower of it. Archelaus, King of Macedon, passing through
a street, som body cast water upon him, was advised by his followers to punish the party.
’Yea, but,’ quoth he, ’who ever it was, he cast not the water upon me, but upon him he
thought I was.’ Socrates to one that told him he was railed upon and ill spoken of: ’Tush,’
said he, ’there is no such thing in me.’ For my part, should one commend me to be an
excellent Pilote, to be very modest, or most chaste, I should owe him no thanks. Likewise
should any man call me traitour, theefe or drunkard, I would deem my self but little
wronged by him. Those who misknow themselves may feed themselves with false
approbations; but not I, who see and search my self into my very bowels, and know full
well what belongs unto me. I am pleased to be less commended, provided I be better
known. I may be esteemed wise for such conditions of wisdom that I account meere
follies. It vexeth me that my Essayes serve Ladies in liew of common ware and stuffe for
their hall; this Chap. wil prefer me to their cabinet: I love their society somewhat
private, their public familiarity wants favor and savor. In farewels we heate above
ordinary our affections to the things we forgo. I here take my last leave of this worlds
pleasures: lo here our last embraces. And now to our theame. Why was the acte of
generation made so natural, so necessary and so just, seeing we fear to speak of it
without shame, and exclude it from our serious and regular discourses we prononce boldly
to rob, to murther, to betray and this we dare not but betweene our teeth. Are we to gather
by it, that the less we breath out in words the more we are allowed to furnish our
thoughts with? For words least used, least writen, and least concealed should best be
understood, and most generally known. No age, no condition are more ignorant of it then
of their bread. They are imprinted in each one, without expressing, without voice or
figure. And the sexe that does it most, is most bound to suppresse it. It is an action we
have put in the precincts of silence, whence to draw it were an offence: not to accuse or
judge it. Nor dare we bear it but in circumlocution and picture. A notable favor, to a
criminal offender, to be so execrable, that justice deem it injustice to touch and behold
him, freed and saved by the benefit of this condemnations severity. It is not herein as in
matters of books, which being once called-in and forbidden, become more saleable and
publik? As for me, I will take Aristotle at his word, that bashfallnesse is an ornament to
youth, but a reproach to age. These verses are preached in the old schoole, a schoole of

which I hold more then of the modern: her vertues seem greater unto me, her vices less.
[Ceux] qui par trop fuiant Venus estrivent
Faillent autant que ceux qui trop la suivent.
Who strive ore much Venus to shunne, offends
Alike with him that wholy her intends.
Tu dea, tu rerum naturam sola gubernas,
Nec sine te quicquam dias in luminis oras
Exoritur, neque fit lætum, nec amabile quicquam. -- Lucr. i. 22.
Goddesse, you rul’st the nature of all things.
Without you nothing into this light springs,
Nothing is lovely, nothing pleasures brings.
I know not who could set Pallas and the Muses at oddes with Venus, and make them
cold and slow in affecting of love; as for me, I se no Deities that better sute together, nor
more endebted one to another. Who-ever shal go about to remove amourous imaginations
from the Muses, shall deprive them of the best entertainement they have, and of the
noblest subject of their work and who shall debarre Cupid the service and conversation of
Poesie, shall weaken him of his best weapons. By this means they caste upon the God of
acquaintance, of amitie and goodwill; and upon the Goddesses, protectresses of humanity
and justice, the vice of ingratitude, and imputation of churlishnesse. I have not so long
been cashiered from the state and service of this God, but that my memory is still
acquainted with the force of his worth and valor.
------ agnosco veteris vestigia flammæ. -- Virg. Æn. iv. 23.
I feel, and feeling know,
How my old flames regrow.
There commonly remaine some reliques of shivering and heate after an
ague:
Nec mihi deficiat color hic, hyemantibus annis.
When Winter years com-on,
Let not this heate be gon.
As drie, as sluggish and unwieldy as I am, I feel yet some warme cinders of my passed
heate.

Qual l’alto Ægeo, perche Aquiloneo Noto
Cessi, che tuto prima il volse e scosse,
Non s’accheta ei pero, ma il suono e ’l moto,
Ritien deli onde anco agitate e grosse.
As graund Ægean Sea, because the voice
Of winds does cease, which it before enraged
Yet does not calme, but stil retaines the noise
And motion of huge billowes; unasswaged.
But for so much as I know of it, the power and might of this God are found more quick
and lively in the shadowe of the Poesie then in their own essence.
Et versus digitos habet. -- Juven. Sat. vi. 197.
Verses have full effect.
Of fingers to erect.
It representeth a kind of aire more lovely then love itself. Venus is not so fair, nor so
alluring, all naked, and quick panting, as she is here in Virgill.
Dixerat, et niveis hinc atque hinc diva lacertis
Cunctantem amplexu molli fovet: Ille repente
Accepit solitam flammam, notusque medullas
Intravit calor, et labe facta per ossa cucurrit
Non secus atque olim tonitru cum rupta corusco
Ignea rima micans percurrit lumine nimbos.-- Virg. Æn. viii. 387.
So said the Goddesse, and with soft embrace
Snow-white arms, the grim-fire does enchase,
He straight took wonted fire, known heate at once
His marrow pearc’t, ranne through his weakned bones;
As fierie flash with thunder does divide,
With radient lightning through a storme does glide.
----- ea verba loquutus,
Optatos dedit amplexus, placidumque petivit
Conjugis infusus gremio per membra soporem. -- Ibid. 404.
A sweet embrace, when he those words had said,
He gave, and his lims pleasing-rest he praid

To take in his wives bosome lolling laid.
What therein I find to be considered is, that he depainteth her somewhat stirring for a
maritall Venus. In this discreete match, appetites are not commonly so fondling, but
drowsie and more sluggish. Love disdaineth a man should hold of other then himself, and
dealeth but faintly with acquaintances begun and entertained under another title as
marriage is. Alliances, respects and means, by all reason, waigh as much or more as the
grace and beauty. A man does not marry for himself, whatsoever he aleageth, but as
much or more for his posterity and families. The use and interest of mariage concerneth
our offspring a great way beyond us. Therefore does this fashion please me, to guide it
rather by a third hand, and by anothers sence, then our own: All which, how much does it
dissent from amorous conventions? Nor is it other then a kind of incest in this reverend
alliance and sacred bond to employ the efforts and extravagant humor of an amorous
licentiousness as I think to have said else-were. One should (says Aristotle) touch his
wife soberly, discreetly and severely, least that tickling too lasciviously pleasure transport
her beyond the bounds of reason. What he speaks for conscience, Phisitions alledge for
health: saying that pleasure excessively whotte, voluptuous and continuall, altereth the
seede and hindereth conception. Some other say, besides, that to a languishing
congression (as naturally that is) to store it with a convenient and fertile heat, one must but
seldom and by moderate intermissions present himself unto it.
Quo rapiet sitiens venerem, interjusque recondant. -- Virg. Georg. iii. 137.
Thirsting to snatch a fit,
And inly harbour it.
I see no mariages faile sooner or more troubled then such as are concluded for beauties
sake, and hudled up for amorous desires. There are required more solid foundations and
more constant grounds, and a more warie marching to it: this earnest youthly heate serveth
to no purpose. Those who think to honor marriage by joyning love unto it (in mine
opinion) do as those who, to do virtue a favor, holde that nobility is no other thing
then Vertue. Indeed, these things have affinitie, but therewithall great difference: their
names and titles should not thus be commixt; both are wronged so to be confounded.
Nobilitie is a worthy, goodly quality, and introduced with good reason, but inasmuch as it
dependeth on others, and may fall to the share of any vicious and worthless fellowe, it is
in estimation far shorte of virtue. If it be a virtue, it is artificiall and visible; relying
both on time and fortune; diverse in form, according unto countries living and mortal;
without birth, as the river Nilus genealogicall and common; by succession and similitude;
drawne along by consequence, but a very weake one. Knowledge, strength, goodnesse,
beauty, wealth and all other qualities fall within compasse of commerce and
communication; whereas this consumeth itself in itself, of no emploiment for the
service of others. One proposed to one of our Kings the choice of two mentors in one
office, the one a Gentleman, the other a Yeoman: he appointed that without respect unto

that quality, he who deserved best shold be elected; but were their valor or worth fully
likewise, the Gentleman should be regarded, this was justlie to give nobility her right and
rank. Antigonus, to an unknown young-man who sued unto him for his fathers charge, a
man of valor and who was lately deceased: ’My friend (quoth he) in such good turnes I
waigh not my soldiers noble birth so much as their sufficiencie.’ Of truth it should not be
herein as with the officers of Spartan kings; Trumpeters, Musitions, Cookes, in whose
roome their children succeeded, how ignorant soever, before the best experienced in the
trade. Those of Calicut make of their nobility a degree above humane. Marriage is
interdicted them, and all other vocations saving war. Of Concubines they may have as
many as they list, and women as many lechardes, without Jealousie one of another. But it
is a capital crime and unremissible offence to contract or marry with any of different
condition: Nay, they deem themselves disparaged and polluted if they have but touched
them in passing by: And as if their honor were much injured and interressed by it they kil
those who approach somewhat too neare them. In such sort that the ignoble are bound to
cry as they walke along, like the Gondoliers or Water men of Venice along the streetes,
least they should jostle with them: and the nobles command them to what side of the way
they please. Thereby do these avoyde an obloquie which they esteeme perpetual, and
those an assured death. No continuance of time, no favor of Prince, no office, no virtue,
nor any wealth can make a clown to become a gentleman; which is much furthered by this
custom, that marriages of one trade with another are strictly forbidden. A Shoo-maker
cannot marry with the race of a Carpenter, and parents are precisely bound to traine up
orphanes in their fathers trade, and in no other. Thereby the difference, the distinction an d
continuance of their fortune is maintained. A good marriage (if any there be) refuseth the
company and conditions of love; it endevoureth to present those of amity. It is a sweet
society of life, full of constancy, of trust, and an infinite number of profitable and solid
offices, and mutual obligations: No woman that throughly and impartially tasteth the
same,
(Optato quamjunxit lumine tæda -- Catul. Com. Ber. 79.
Whom loves-fire joined in double band,
With wished light of marriage brand)
would foregoe her estate to be her husbands master. Be she lodged in his affection as a
wife, she is much more honourably and surely lodged. Be a man passionately entangled in
any unlawfull lust or love, let them then be damned on whom he would rather have some
shame or disgrace to alight; either on his lawfull wife, or on his lechard mistris, whose
misfortune would afflict him most, and to whom he wisheth greater good or more honor.
These questions admit no doubt in an absolute sound [marriage]. The reason we see so few
good, is an apparant signe of its worth, and a testimony of its price. Perfectly to fashion
and rightly to take it, is the worthiest and best part of our societie. We cannot be without
it, and yet we disgrace and vilifie the same. It may be compared to a cage, the birds
without despair to get in, and those within despair to get out. Socrates being demanded

whether was most commodeous to take or not to take a wife: ’Which soever a man does
(quoth he), he shall repent it.’ It is a match wherto may well be applied the common
saying, Homo homini aut Deus, aut lupus: (Eras. Chil. i. cent. i. 69, 70.) ’Man unto man is
either a God or a Wolfe,’ to the perfect erecting whereof are the concurrences of diverse
qualities required. It is, now a dayes, found most fit or commodious for simple mindes and
popular spirits whom dainties, curiosity and idleness do not so much trouble. Licentious
humors, debaushed conceits (as are mine), who hate all manner of duties, bondes, or
observances are not so fit, so proper, and so suitable for it.
Et mihi dulce magis resoluto vivere collo. -- Cor. Gal. El. i. 61.
Sweeter it is to me,
With loose necke to live free.
Of my own disposition, would wisdom itself have had me, I should have refused
to wed her. But we may say our pleasure; the custom and use of common like
overbeareth us. Most of my actions are guided by example, and not by election; yet, did I
no t properly envite my self unto it, I was led and brought thereunto by strange and
unexpected occasions; for, not only incommodious things, but foul, vicious and
inevitable, may by some condition and accident become acceptable and allowed. So vain
is mans posture and defense; and truely I was then drawne unto it, being but ill prepared
and more backeward then now I am that have made trial of it. And as licencious as the
world reputes me, I have (in good truth) more stricktly observed the laws of wedlock
then either I had promised or hoped. It is no longer time to wince when one has put on
the shackles. A man ought wisely to husband his liberty, but after he has once submitted
himself unto bondage, he is to stick unto it by the laws of common duty, or at least
enforce himself to keep them. Those which undertake that covenant to deale therein
with hate and contempt, do both injustly and incommodiously; and that goodly rule I see
pass from hand to hand among women, as a sacred oracle,
Sers ton mary comme ton maistre:
Et t’en garde comme un traistre.
Your husband as your master serve yee:
From him as from false friend preserve yee.
which is as much to say, Beare your self toward him with a constrained enemy and
distrustfull reverence (a stile of war, and cry of defiance) is likewise injurious and
difficult. I am to mild for such crabbed dessignes. To say truth, I am not yet come to that
perfection of sufficiency and quaintness of wit, as to confound reason with injustices and
laugh or scoffe at each order or rule that jumps not with my humor. To hate superstition,
I do not presently cast my self into irreligion. If one do not alwaies discharge his duty,

yet ought he at least ever love, ever acknowledge it. It is treason for one to marry unless
he wed. But go we on. Our Poet describeth a marriage full of accord and good agreement,
wherein notwithstanding there is not much loyalty. Did he meane it was not possible to
performe loves rights, and yet reserve some rights toward marriage; and that one may
bruse it, without altogether breaking it? A servant may picke his masters purse, and yet
not hate him. Beauty, opportunity, destiny (for destiny, has also a hand therin)
--------fatum est in partibus illis.
Quas sinus abscondit; nam si tibi sidera cassent,
Nil faciet longi mensura incognita nervi. Juven. Sat. ix. 32.
In those parts there is fate, which hidden are;
If then you be not wrought-for by your starre,
The measure of long nerves unknown to nothing serves.
have entangled a woman to a stranger, yet perhaps not so absolutely, but that some
bond may be left to hold her to her husband. They are two dissignes, having severall and
unconfounded pathes leading to them. A woman may yield to such a man whom in no
case she would have married. I meane not for the conditions of his fortune, but for the
qualities of his person. Few men have wedded their sweet hearts, their paramours or
mistresses, but have come home by Weeping Crosse, and ere long repented their bargaine.
And even in the other world, what an unquiet life leades Jupiter with his wife, whom
before he had secretly knowen and lovingly enjoyed? This is as they say, ’to beray the
panier, and then put it on your head.’ My self have seen in some good place love
shamefully and dishonestly cured by mariage, the considerations are too much different.
We love without disturbance to ourselves; two diverse and in themselves contrary things.
Isocrates said, that the town of Athens pleased men, even as Ladies do whom we serve
for affection. Every one loved to come thither, to walke and pass away the time, but none
affected to wed it; that is to say: to endenison, to dwell and habituate himself therein. I
have (and that to my spight and grief), seen husbands hate their wives, only because
themselves wronged them. Howsoever, we should not love them less for our faults; at
least for repentance and compassion they ought to be dearer unto us. These are different
ends (says he), and yet in some sort compatible. Wedlocke has for his share, honor,
justice, profit and constancy, a plaine but more general delight. Love melts in only
pleasure and truly it has it more ticklish, more lively, more quaint, and more sharpe, a
pleasure inflamed by difficulty; there must be a kind of stinging, tingling and smarting. It
is no longer love, be it once without Arrowes or without fire. The liberality of Ladies is to
profuse in marriage, and blunts the edge of affection and desire. To avoide this
inconvenience, see the punishment inflicted by the laws of Lycurgus and Plato. But
Women are not altogether in the wrong, when they refuse the rules of life prescribed to the
World, forasmuch as only men have established them without their consent. There is
commonly brauling and contention between them and us; and the nearest consent we have
with them is but stormy and tumultuous. In the opinion of our Authour, we heerin use

them but inconsiderately. After we have knowen, that without comparison they are much
more capable and violent in Loves-effects then we, as was testified by that ancient Priest
who had been both man and woman, and tried the passions of both sexes.
Venus huic erat utraque nota: -- Ovid. Meta. iii. 323. Tiros.
Of both sortes he knew venery.
We have moreover learned by their own mouth, what tryall was made of it, though in
diverse ages, by an Emperor and an Empresse of Rome, both skilful and famous masters
in lawlesse lust and unruly wantonnesse; for he in one night deflowred ten Sarmatian
virgines that were his captives; but she really did one night night also answer twenty
severall assaults, changing her assailants as she found cause to supply her neede to fit her
taste,
------adhuc ardens rigidæ tentigine vulvæ
Et lassata viris, nondum satiata necessit. -- Juven. Sat. vi. 127.
and that upon the controversie happened in Catalogne betweene a wife and a husband;
she complaining on his over-violence and continuance therein not so much in my
conceit, because she was thereby over-labored, (for but by faith I believe not miracles), as
under this pretext, to abridge and bridle the authority of husbands over their wives, which
is the fundamental part of marriage: and to show that their frowning, sullennesse and
peevishnesse exceed the very nuptiall bed, and trample under-foote the very beauties,
graces and delights of Venus (to whose complaint her husband, a right churlish and rude
fellow answered, that even on fasting dayes he must needs do it ten times at least) was by
the Queene of Aragon given this notable sentence: by which after mature deliberation of
counsel, the good Queen to establish a rule and imitable example unto all posterity, for the
moderation and required modesty in a lawfull marriage, ordained the number of sixe times
a day as a lawfull, necessary and competent limit. Releasing and diminishing a great part
of her sexes neede and desire, to establish (quoth she) an easy form, and consequently
permanent and immutable. Hereupon doctors cry out; what is the appetite and lust of
women, when as their reason, their reformation and their virtue, is retailed at such a rate?
considering the diverse judgement of our desires: for Solon, master of the lawiers schoole
alloweth but three times a month because this matrimoniall entercourse should not decay
or faile. Now after we beleeved (say I) and preached thus much, we have for their
particular portion allotted them continency, as their last and extreme penalty. There is no
passion more importunate then this, which we would have them only to resist; not simply
as a vice in itself, but as abbomination and execration, and more then irreligion and
parricide; whilst we ourselves without blame or reproach offend in it at our pleasure.
Even those amongst us who have earnestly labored to overcome lust, have sufficiently
viewed what difficulty, or rather unresistable impossibilitie they found in it, using

nevertheless materiall remedies, to tame, to weaken and coole the body. And we on the
other side would have them sound, healthy, strong, in good liking, well-fed and chaste
together, that is to say, both hot and colde. For marriage, which we averre should hinder
them from burning, affords them but smal refreshing, according as our manners are. If
they meet with a husband whose force by reason of his age is yet boyling, he will take a
pride to spend it else-where.
Sit tandem pudor, aut eamus in ius,
Multis mentula millibus redempta,
Non est hæc tua, Basse, vendidisti. -- Mart. xii. Epig. xcix. 10.
The philosopher Polemon was iustly called in question by his wife, for sowing in a
barren fielde the fruit due to the fertile. But if they match with broken stuffe in ful
wedlocke, they are in worse case then either virgins or widowes. We deem them
sufficiently furnished if they have a man lie by them. As the Romans reputed Clodia Leta
a vestall-virgin defloured, whom Caligula had touched, although it was manifestly
prooved he had but approached her; But on the contrary, their need or longing is thereby
encreased; for but the touch or company of any man whatsoever stirreth up their heate,
which in their solytude was husht and quiet, and lay as cinders raked up in ashes. And to
the end, as it is likely, to make by this circumstance and consideration their chastitie more
meritorious: Boleslaus and Kinge his wife, King and Queene of Poland, lying together,
the first day of their mariage vowed it with mutual consent, and in despight of all
wedlocke commoditie of nuptiall delightes maintained the same. Even from their infancy
we frame them to the sports of love: their instruction, behaviour, attire, grace, learning
and all their words aimeth only at love, respects only affection. Their nurces and their
keepers imprint no other thing in them, then the lovelinesse of love, were it but by
continually presenting the same unto them, to distaste them of it: my daughter (al the
children I have) is of the age wherein the laws excuse the forwardest to marry . She is of
a slowe, nice and mild complexion, and has accordingly been brought up by her mother
in a retired and particular manner: so that she beginneth but now to put-off childish
simplicitie. She was one day reading a French book before me, an obscene word came in
her way (more bawdie in sound then in effect, it signifieth the name of a Tree and another
thing), the woman that looks to her stayed her presently, and somwhat churlishly making
her step over the same: I let her alone, because I would not crosse their rules, for I medle
nothing with this government: womens policy has a mysticall proceeding, we must be
content to leave it to them. But if I be not deceived, the conversation of twenty lacqueis
could not in six moneths have setled in her thoughts, the understanding, the use and
consequences of the sound belonging to those filthy sillables as did that good olde woman
by her checke and interdiction.
Motus doceri gaudet Ionicos.
Matura virgo, et fingitur artubus
Jam nunc, et incestos amores

De tenero meditatur ungui. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. vi. 21.
Maides mariage-ripe straight to be taught delight
Ionique daunces, fram’de by arte aright
In every joint, and ev’n from their first hair
Incestuous loves in meditation bear.
Let them somwhat dispence with ceremonies, let them fal into free liberty of speach;
we are but children, we are but gulles, in respect of them, about any such subject. Heare
them relate how we sue, how we wooe, how we sollicitie, and how we entertaine them,
they will soone give you to understand that we can say, that we can do, and that we can
bring them nothing but what they already knew, and had long before digested without us.
May it be (as Plato says) because they have one time or other been themselves wanton,
licentious and amorous lads? Mine ears hapned one day in a place, where without
suspicion they might listen and steale some of their private, lavish and bould discourses; O
why is it not lawful for me to repeat them? Birlady (quoth I to my self), It is high time
indeed for us to go studie the phrases of Amadis, the metaphors of Aretine, and eloquence
of Boccace, thereby to become more skilfull, more ready and more sufficient to confront
them: surely we bestow our time well; there is nor quaint phrase nor choise word, nor
ambiguous figure, nor patheticall example, nor love-expressing gesture, nor alluring
posture, but they know them all better then our bookes: it is a cunning bred in their vaines
and will never out of the flesh,
Et mentem Venus ipsa dedit. -- Virg. Georg. iii. 267.
Venus herself assign’de
To them both means and mind,
which these skill infusing School-mistresses nature, youth, health and opportunity, are
ever buzzing in their ears, ever whispering in their minds: they need not learn, nor take
paines about it; they beget it, with them it is borne.
Nec tantum niveo gavisa est nulla columbo
Compar, vel si quid dicitur improbius,
Oscula mordenti semper decerpere rostro:
Quantum præcipue multivola est mulier. -- Catul. Eleg. iv. 125.
No pigeons hen, or pair, or what worse name
You list, makes with her Snow-white cock such game,
With biting bill to catch when she is kist,
As many-mind ed women when they list.

Had not this natural violence of their desires been somwhat held in awe by fear and
honor, wherewith they have been provided, we had all been defamed. All the worlds
motions bend and yield to this conjunction, it is a matter every-where infused; and a
Centre whereto all lines come, all things looke. The ordinances of ancient and wise Rome,
ordained for the service, and instituted for the behoofe of love, are yet to be seen:
together with the precepts of Socrates to instruct courtizans.
Nec non libelli Stoici inter sericos
Iacere paluillos amant. -- Hor. Epod. viii. 15.
Ev’n Stoics books are pleas’d
Amidst silke cushions to be eas’d.
Zeno among other laws, ordered also the struglings, the opening of legs, and the actions,
which happen in the deflowring of a virgin. Of what sense was the book of Strato the
philosopher, of carnall copulation? And whereof treated Theophrastus in those he entitled,
one The Lover, the other Of Love? Whereof Aristippus in his volume Of ancient
deliciousnesse or sports? What implied or what imported the ample and lively
descriptions in Plato, of the loves practised in his dayes? And the lover of Demetrius
Phalereus? And Clinias, or the forced lover of Heraclides Ponticus? And that of
Antisthenes, of the getting of children, or of weddings? And the other, Of the Master, or of
the lover? And that of Aristo, Of amorous exercises? Of Cleanthes, one of love, another of
the Art of love? The amorous dialogues of Spherus? And the filthy intolerable, and
without blushing not to be uttered fable of Jupiter and Iuno, written by Chrysippus? And
his so lascivious fifty Epistles? I will omit the writings of some Philosophers who have
followed the sect of Epicurus, protectresse of all manner of sensuality and carnall pleasure.
Fifty severall Deities were in times past allotted to this office. And there has been a
nation found, which to allay and coole the lustfull concupiscence of such as came for
devotion, kept wenches of purpose in their temples to be used; and it was a point of
religion to deale with them before one went to prayers. Nimirum propter continentiam
incontinentia necessaria est, incendium ignibus extinguitur: ’Belike we must be
incontinent that we may be continent, burning is quenched by fire.’ In most places of the
world that part of our body was deified. In that same province some flayed it to offer, and
consecrated a peece thereof; others offred and consecrated their seed: In another the young
men did publikely pierce and in diverse places open their yard between flesh and skin, and
through the holes put the longest and biggest stickes they could endure, and of those
stickes made afterwards a fire, for an offring to their Gods, and were esteemed of small
vigor and less chastity if by the force of that cruel pain they showed any dismay. Else-
where the most sacred magistrate was reverenced and acknowledged by those parts. And
in diverse ceremonies the portraiture thereof was carried and showed in pompe and state, to
the honor of sundry Deities. The Egyptian dames in their Bacchanalian feasts wore a
wodden one about their necks, exquisitely fashioned, as huge and heavy as every one
could conveniently bear: besides that which the statue of their God represented, which in

measure exceeded the rest of his body. The maried women here-by, with their Coverchefs
frame the figure of one upon their forheads; to glory, themselves with the enjoying they
have of it; and coming to be widowes, they place it behind, and hide it under their
quoifes. The greatest and wisest matrons of Rome were honoured for offring flowers and
garlands to God Priapus. And when their Virgins were maried, they (during the nuptials)
were made to sit upon their privities. Nor am I sure whether in my time I have not seen a
glimps of like devotion. What meant that laughter-moving, and maids looke-drawing
peece our fathers wore in their breeches, yet extant among the Switzers? To what end is at
this present day the show of our formall under our Gascoine hoses? and often (which is
worse) above their natural greatness, by falshood and imposture? A little thing would
make me believe that the said kind of garment was invented in the best and most upright
ages, that the world might not be deceived, and all men should yield a public account of
their sufficiency. The simplest nations have it yet somewhat resembling the true form.
Then was the work-mans skill instructed, how it is to be made, by the measure of the
arm or foot. That good-meaning man, who in my youth, thorowout his great city, caused
so many fair, curious and ancient statues to be guelded, lest the sense of seeing might be
corrupted, following the advice of that other good ancient man,
Flagitii principium est nudare inter cives corpora. -- Cic. Tusc. iv. En.
Mongst civill people sinne,
By baring bodies we beginne,
should have considered, how in the mysteries of the good Goddesse, all apparance of man
was excluded; that he was no whit nearer, if he did not also procure both horses and asses,
and at length nature herself to be guelded.
Omne adeo qenus in terris, hominumque ferarumque,
Et genus æquoreum, pecuæs, pictæque volucres,
Infurias ignemque ruunt. -- Virg. Georg iii. 244.
All kindes of things on earth, wild beast, mankinde,
Field-beasts, fair-fethered fowle, and fish (we find)
Into loves fire and fury run by kind.
The Gods (says Plato) have furnished man with a disobedient, skittish, and tyrannical
member; which like an untamed furious-beast, attempteth by the violence of his appetite
to bring all things under his becke. So have they allotted women another as insulting,
wild and fierce; in nature like a greedy, devouring, and rebellious creature, who if when
he craveth it, he be refused nourishment, as impatient of delay, it enrageth; and infusing
that rage into their bodies stoppeth their conduicts, hindreth their respiration, and causeth
a thousand kindes of inconveniences; until sucking up the fruit of the general thirst, it

have largely bedewed and enseeded the bottome of their matrix. Now my law-giver
should also have considered that perhaps it were a more chaste and commodiously
fruitfull use betimes to give them a knowledgeand taste of the quick, then according to
the liberty and heate of their fantasies suffer them to ghesse and imagine the same. In lieu
of true essentiall parts they by desire surmise and by hope substitute others, three times as
extravagant. And one of my acquaintance was spoiled by making open show of his in
place, where yet it was not convenient to put them in possession of their more serious use.
What harme cause not those huge draughts or pictures, which wanton youth with chalke or
coales draw in each passage, wall, or staires of our great houses, whence a cruel contempt
of our natural store is bred in them? Who knows whether Plato, ordaining amongst
other well-instituted Commonwealths, that men and women, old and yoong, should in
their exercises or Gymnastickes present themselves naked one to the sight of another,
aimed at that or no? The Indian women, who daily without interdiction view their men all
over, have at least wherewith to assuage and coole the sense of their seeing. And
whatsoever the women of that great kingdome of Pegu say, who from their waist
downward, have nothing to cover themselves but a single cloth slith before; and that so
straight that what nice modesty or ceremonious decencie soever they seem to affect, one
may plainly at each step see what God has sent them: that it is an invention or shift
devised to draw men unto them, and withdraw them from other men or boies, to which
unnaturall brutish sinne that nation is wholly addicted: it might be said, they lose more
than they get: and that a full hunger is more vehement then one which has been glutted,
be it but by the eyes. And Livia said, that to an honest woman a naked man is no more
then an Image. The Lacedemonian women, more virgin-wives then are our maidens, saw
every day the young men of their citie naked at their exercises: themselves nothing precise
to hide their thighes in walking, esteeming themselves (says Plato) sufficiently cloathed
with their virtue, without vardingall. But those of whom S. Augustine speaks, have
attributed much to nakednesse, who made a question, whether women at the last day of
judgement should rise again in their proper sex, and not rather in ours, lest even then they
tempt us in that holy state. In summe, we lure and every way flesh them: we uncessantly
enflame and encite their imagination: and then we cry out, But oh, but oh, the belly. Let us
confesse the truth, there are few amongst us that fear not more the same they may have
by their wives offences, than by their own vices; or that cares not more (oh wondrous
charity) for his wives, then his own conscience; or that had not rather be a theefe and
church-robber, and have his wife a murderer and an heretike, then not more chaste than
himself. Oh impious estimation of vices! Both we and they are capable of a thousand
more hurtful and unnaturall corruptions then is lust or lasciviousnesse. But we frame
vices and waigh sinnes, not according to their nature, but according to our interest;
whereby they take so many different unequall formes. The severity of our laws makes
womens inclination to that vice more violent and faulty then its condition beareth; and
engageth it to worse proceedings then is their cause. They will readily offer rather to
follow the practise of law, and plead at the barre for a fee, or go to the wars for
reputation, then in the midst of idlenesse and deliciousnesse be tied to keep so hard a
Sentinell, so dangerous a watch. See tbey not plainly, how there is neither Merchant,

Lawyer, Souldier, or Church-man, but will leave his accounts, forsake his client, quit his
glory and neglect his function, to follow this other business. And the burden-bearing
porter, souterly cobbler and toilefull labourer, all harassed, all besmeared and all bemoiled
through travell, labor and trudding, will forget all, to please himself with this pleasing
sport.
Num tu quæ tenuit dives Achæmenes,
Aut pinguis Phryqiæ Mygdonias opes,
Permutare velis crine Liciniæ,
Plenas aut Arabum domos,
Dum fragrantia detorquet ad oscula
Cervicem aut facili sævitia negat,
Quæ poscente magis gaudeat eripi,
Interdum rapere occupet? -- HOR. Car. ii. Od. xii. 21.
Would you exchange for your fair mistresse hair,
All that the rich Achæmenes did hold,
Or all that fertill Phrygias soile does bear,
Or all th’Arabians store of spice and gold?
Whilst she to fragrant kisses turnes her head,
Or with a courteous coinesse them denies;
Which more then he that speeds she would have sped,
And which sometimes to snatch she formost hies?
I wot not whether Cæsars exploits, or Alexanders atchivements exceed in hardinesse
the resolution of a beauteous young woman, trained after our manner in the open view and
uncontrolled conversation of the world,sollicited and battered by so many contrary
examples, exposed to a thousand assaults and continuall pursuits, yet still holding herself
good and unvanquished. There is no point of doing more thorny nor more active then this
of not doing. I find it easier to bear all ones life a combersome armour on his backe
then a maiden-head. And the vow of virginity is the noblest of all vows, because the
hardest. Diaboli virtus in lumbis est: (Hieron.) ’The divel’s master-point lies in our loines,’
says St. Jerome. Surely we have resigned the most difficult and vigorous devoire of
mankinde unto women, and quit them the glory of it, which might stead them as a singular
motive to opinionate themselves therein, and serve them as a worthy subiect to brave us,
and trample under feet that vain preheminence of valor and virtue we pretend over
them. They shall find (if they but heed it) that they shall thereby not only be highly
regarded, but also more beloved. A gallant undaunted spirit leaveth not his pursuits for a
bare refusall; so it be a refusall of chastitie, and not of choise. We may sweare, threaten
and wailingly complain; we lie, for we love them the better. There is no enticing lure to
wisdom and secret modesty; so it be not rude, churlish, and froward. It is blockishnesse
and basenesse to be obstinately willfull against hatred and contempt. But against a
vertuous and constant resolution matched with an acknowledging mind, it is the exercise

of a noble and generous mind. They may accept of our service unto a certain measure,
and make us honestly perceive how they disdaine us not, for the law which enjoineth them
to abhorre us because we adore them, and hate us forasmuch as love them, is doubtlesse
very cruel, were it but for its difficultie. Why may they not listen to our offers and not
gain-say our requests, so long as they containe themselves within the bounds of
modesty? Wherefore should we imagine they inwardly affect a freer meaning? A Queene
of our time said wittily, that ’to refuse mens kind summons is a testimony of much
weaknesse, and an accusing of ones own facility; and that an unattempted Lady could not
vaunt of her chastitie.’ Honours limits are not restrained so short; they may somewhat be
slacked, and withoutoffending somewhat dispensed withall. At the end of his frontiers
there is left a free, indifferent, and newter space. He that could drive and force his
mistresse into a corner and reduce her into her fort, has no great matter in him if he be
not content with his fortune. The price or honor of the conquest is rated by the difficultie.
Will you know what impression your merits, your services and worth have made in her
heart? Iudge of it by her behaviour and disposition. Some one may give more that (all
things considered) gives not so much. The obligation of a benefit has wholly reference
unto the will of him that gives; other circumstances which fall within the compasse of
good-turnes, are dumbe, dead and casual. That little she gives may cost her more then all
her companion has. If rarenesse be in any thing worthy estimation, it ought to be in this.
Respect now how little it is, but how few have it to give. The value of money is changed
according to the coine, stampe or marke of the place. Whatsoever the spight or
indiscretion of some may upon the excess of their discontentment make them say: Vertue
and truth do ever recover their advantage. I have knowen some whose reputation has
long time been impeached by wrong and interessed by reproach, restored unto all mens
good opinion and general approbation without care or art, only by their constancy, each
repenting and denying what he formerly beleeved. From wenches somewhat suspected,
they now hold the first rank amongst honorable ladies. Some told Plato that all the
world spake ill of him: ’Let them say what they list,’ quoth he, ’I will so live that Ile make
them recant and change their speeches.’ Besides the fear of God and the reward of so
rare a glory which should incite them to preserve themselves, the corruption of our age
enforceth them unto it, and were I in their clothes, there is nothing but I would rather do
then commit my reputation into so dangerous hands. In my time the leisure of reporting
and blabbing what one has done (a pleasure not much short of the act itself in
sweetness) was only allowed to such as had some assured, trustie, and singular friend;
whereas now-a-days the ordinary entertainements and familiar discourses of meetings and
at tables are the boastings of favors received, graces obtained, and secret liberalities of
Ladies. Verily, it is too great an abjection and argueth a basenesse of heart, so fiercely to
suffer these tender, daintie, delicious joyes to be persecuted, pelted, and foraged by
persons so ungrateful, so undiscreet, and so giddy-headed. This our immoderate and
lawlesse exasperation against this vice, proceedeth and is bred of jealousie; the most vain
and turbulent infirmitie that may afflict mans mind.
Quis vetat apposito lumen de lumine sumi?

Dent licet assidue, nil tamen inde perit. -- Ovid. Art. Amand. iii. 93.
To borrow light of light, who would deny?
Though still they give, nothing is lost thereby.
That, and Envie her sister, are (in mine opinion) the fondest of the troupe. Of the latter,
I cannot say much; a passion which how effectuall and powerfull soever they set forth, of
her good favor she meddles not with me. As for the other I know it only by sight. Beasts
have some feeling of it. The shepheard Cratis being fallen in love with a she Goat, her
Bucke for jealousie beat out his braines as he lay asleepe. We have raised to the highest
strain the excess of this moodie feaver, after the example of some barbarous nations:
The best disciplines have therewith been tainted, it is reason, but not carried away by it:
Ense maritali nemo confossus adulter,
Purpureo stygias sanguine tinxit aquas.
With husbands sword yet no adulter slain,
With purple blood did Stygian waters staine.
Lucullus, Cæsar, Pompey, Anthony, Cato, and diverse other gallant men were Cuckolds,
and knew it, though they made no stir about it. There was in all that time but one gullish
coxcombe Lepidus, that died with the anguish of it.
Ah tum te miserum malique fati,
Quæm attractis pedibus patente porta.
Percurrent mugilesque raphanique. -- Catul. Lyr. Epig. xv. 17.
Ah you then wretched, of accursed fate,
Whom Fish-wives, Redish-wives of base est
ate, Shall scoffing over-run in open gate.
And the God of our Poet, when he surprised one of his companions napping with his wife,
was contented but to shame them:
Atque aliquis de dis non tristibus optat,
Sic fieri turpis. -- Ovid. Met. iv. 187.
Some of the merier Gods does wish in heart
To share their shame, of pleasure to take part.
And yet forbeareth not to be enflamed with the gentle dalliances and amorous
blandishments she offereth him, complaining that for so slight a matter he should distrust

her to him dear-dear affection:
Quid causes petis ex alto? fiducia cessit
Quo tibi Diva mei -- Virg. Æn. viii. 395.
So far why fetch you your pleas pedigree?
Whither is fled the trust you had in me?
And which is more, she becomes a suiter to him in the behalfe of a bastard of hers,
Arma rogo genitrix nato. -- Ibid. 382.
A mother for a son, I crave,
An armor he of you may have.
Which is freely granted her: and Vulcan speaks honourably of Aeneas,
Arma acri facienda viro. -- Ibid. 441.
An armour must be hammered out,
For one of courage stern and stout.
In truth with an humanity more then humane. And which excess of goodnesse by my
consent shall only be left to the Gods:
Nec divas hominis componier æquum est. -- Catul. Eleg. iv. 141.
Nor is it meet, that men with Gods
Should be compar’d, there is such ods.
As for the confusion of children, besides that the gravest law-makers appoint and affect it
in their Common-wealths, it concerneth not women with whom this passion is, I wot not
how in some sort better placed, fitter seated.
Sæpe etiam Iuno maxima coelicolum
Conjugis inculpa flagravit quotidiana. -- Catul. Eleg. iv. 138.
Ev’n Juno, chief of Goddesses, oft-time,
Hath grown hot at her husbands daily crime.
When jealousie once seazeth on thesesilly, weake, and unresisting soules, ’tis pitiful to see

how cruelly it tormenteth, insultingly it tyrannizeth them. It insinuateth itself under
colour of friendship; but after it once possesseth them, the same causes which served for a
ground of good-will, serve for the foundation of mortal hatred. Of all the mindes diseases,
that is it, whereto most things serve for sustenance, and fewest for remedy. The virtue,
courage, health, merit and reputation of their husbands are the firebrands of their despight,
and motives of their rage.
Nullæ sunt inimicitiæ nisi amoris acerbæ. -- Prop. ii. El. viii. 3.
No enmities so bitter prove
And sharpe, as those which spring of love.
This consuming feaver blemisheth and corrupteth all that otherwise is good and goodly
in them. And how chaste or good a huswife soever a jealous woman is, there is no action
of hers but tasteth of sharpnesse and smaks of importunity. It is a furious perturbation, a
moody agitation, which throwes them into extremities altogether contrary to the cause.
The success of one Octavius in Rome was strange, who, having layen with and enjoied
the love of Pontia Posthumia, increased his affection by enjoying her, and instantly sued
to mary her;but being unable to persuade her, his extreme passionate love precipitated
him into effects of a most cruel, mortal and inexorable hatred, whereupon he killed her.
Likewise the ordinary Symptomes or passions of this other amorous disease are intestine
hates, slie Monopolies, close conspiracies:
Notumque, furens quid foemina possit. -- Virg. Æn. v. 6.
It is known what a woman may,
Whose raging passions have no stay.
And a raging spight, which so much the more fretteth itself by being forced to excuse it
self under pretence of good-will. Now the duty of chastitie has a large extension and
far-reaching compasse. Is it their will we would have them to bridle? That’s a part very
pliable and active. It is very nimble and quick-rolling to be staied. What? If dreames do
sometimes engage them so far as they cannot dissemble nor deny them; It lieth not in
them (nor perhaps in chastitie itself, seeing she is a female) to shield themselves from
concupiscence and avoid desiring. If only their will interesse and engage us, where and in
what case are we? Imagine what great throng of men there would be in pursuit of this
privilege, with winged speed (though without eyes and without tongue) to be conveied
upon the point of every woman that would buy him. The Scythian women were wont to
thrust out the eyes of all their slaves and prisoners taken in war, thereby to make more
free and private use of them. Oh what a furious advantage is opportunity ! He that should
demand of me what the chief or first part in love is, I would answer, To know how to take
fit time; even so the second, and likewise the third. It is a point which may do all in all. I

have often wanted fortune, but sometimes also enterprise. God shield him from harme that
can yet mocke himself with it. In this age more rashnesse is required; which our youths
excuse under colour of heat. But should our women looke nearer unto it, they might find
how it rather proceedeth of contempt. I superstitiously feared to offend; and what I love I
willingly respect. Besides that, who depriveth this merchandize of reverence, defaceth all
luster of it. I love that a man should therein somewhat play the child, the dastard and the
servant. If not altogether in this, yet in some other things I have some aires or motives of
the sottish bashfulness, whereof Plutarch speaks; and the course of my life has
diversly been wounded and tainted by it: a quality very ill beseeming my universall
form. And what is there amongst us but sedition and jarring? Mine eyes be as tender to
bear a refusall as to refuse; and it does so much trouble me to be troublesome to others,
that where occasions force me or dutie compelleth me to trie the will of any one, be it in
doubtfull things, or of cost unto him, I do it but faintly and much against my will but if it
be for my own private business (though Homer say most truly, that in an indigent or
needy man, bashfulness is but a foolish virtue) I commonly substitute a third party, who
may blush in my roome: and direct them that employ me, with like difficulty: so that it
has sometimes befallen me to have the will to deny when I had not power to refuse. It is
then folly to go about to bridle women of a desire so fervent and so natural in them. And
when I hear them bragge to have so virgin-like a will and cold mind, I but laugh and
mocke at them. They recoile too far backward. If it be a toothlesse beldame or decrepit
grandame, or a young drie pthisicke starveling; if it be not altogether credible, they have at
least some colour or apparence to say it. But those which stir about and have a little
breath left them, marre but their market with such stuffe: forasmuch as inconsiderate
excuses are no better then accusations. As a Gentleman my neighbour, who was
suspected of insufficiencie,
Languidior tenera cui pendens sicula beta,
Nunquam se mediam sustulit ad tunicam, -- Catul. El. iii. 21.
to justify himself, three or foure dayes after his mariage, swore confidently that the night
before he had performed twenty courses, which oath has since served to convince him of
meere ignorance, and to divorce him from his wife. Besides, this allegation is of no great
worth; for there is nor continencie nor virtue where no resistance is to the contrary. It is
true, may one say, but I am not ready to yield. The Saints themselves speak so. This is
understood of such as boast in good earnest of their coldnesse and insensibility, and would
be credited with a serious countenance: for, when it is from an affected looke (where the
eyes give words the lie) and from the faltring speech of their profession (which ever
workes against the wooll) I allow of it. I am a duteous servant unto plainnesse, simplicity
and liberty; but there is no remedie, if it be not meerely plaine, simple, or infantine; it is
foolish, inept and unseemely for Ladies in this commerce; it presently inclineth and bendeth
to impudence. Their disguisings, their figures and dissimulations cozen none but fooles;
there lying sitteth in the chaire of honor; it is a by-way, which by a false posterne leads
us unto truth. If we cannot containe their imaginations, what require we of them? the

effects? Many there be who are free from all strangers communication, by which chastitie
may be corrupted and honestie defiled.
Illud sæpe facit, quod sine teste facit. -- Mart. vii. Epig. lxi. 6.
What she does with no witness to it,
She often may be found to do it.
And those whom we fear least are perhaps most to be feared; their secret sins are
the worst.
Ofendor moecha simpliciore minus. -- Ibid. vi. Epig. vii. 6.
Pleas’d with a whores simplicity.
Offended with her nicitie.
There are effects which without impuritie may lose them their pudicitie, and which is
more, without their knowledge. Obstetrix virginis cuiusdam integritatem manu velut
explorans, sive malevolentia, sive inscitia, sive casu, dum inspicit, perdidit: ’A Midwife
searching with her finger into a certain maiden’s virginity, either for ill will, or of
unskilfulnesse, or by chance, while she seekes and looks into it, she lost and spoiled
it.’ Some one has lost or wronged her virginity in looking or searching for it; some other
killed the same in playing with it. We are not able precisely to circumscribe them the
actions we forbid them: Our law must be conceived under general and uncertaine termes.
The very Idea we forge unto their chastity i ridiculous. For amongst the extremest
examples or patternes I have of it, it is Fatua, the wife of Faunas, who, after she was
maried, would never suffer herself to be seen of any man whatsoever. And Hierons
wife, that never felt her husbands stinking breath, supposing it to be a quality common to
all men. It were necessary, that to satisfie and please us, they should become insensible
and invisible. Now let us confesse that the knot of the judgement of this duty consisteth
principally in the will. There have been husbands who have endured this accident, not
only without reproach and offence against their wives, but with singular acknowledgment,
obligation and commendation to their virtue. Some one that more esteemed her honestie
then she loved her life, has prostituted the same unto the lawlesse lust and raging
sensuality of a mortal hateful enemy, thereby to save her husbands life; and has done
that for him which she never could have been induced to do for herself. This is no place
to extend these examples; they are too high and over-rich to be presented in this luster: let
us therefore reserve them for a nobler seat. But to give you some examples of a more
vulgar stampe. Are there not women daily seen amongst us, who for the only profit of
their husbands, and by their express order and brokage, make sale of their honesty? And
in old times Phaulius the Argian, through ambition offred his to King Philip. Even as that
Galba, who bestowed a supper on Mecenas, perceiving him and his wife beginne to bandy

eye-trickes and signes, of civility shrunke down upon his cushion, as one expressed with
sleepe, to give better scope unto their love: which he avouched as pretily: for at that
instant a servant of his, presuming to lay hands on the plate which was on the table, he
cried outright unto him: ’How now varlet? seest you not I sleepe only for Mecenas?’ One
may be of loose behaviour, yet of purer will and better reformed then another who frameth
herself to a precise apparance. As some are seen complain because they vowed
chastitie before yeeres of discretion or knowledge, so have I seen others unfainedly
bewaile and truly lament that they were vowed to licentiousnesse and dissolutenes before
the age of judgement and distinction. The parents leaudnesse may be the cause of it; or the
force of impulsive necessity, which is a shrewd counsellor and a violent perswader.
Though chastity were in the East Indias of singular esteeme, yet the custom permitted
that a maried wife might freely betake herself to what man soever did present her an
Elephant: and that which some glory to have been valued at so high a rate. Phedon the
philosopher, of a noble house, after the taking of his country Elis, professed to prostitute
the beauty of his youth to all commers, so long as it should continue, for money to live
with and bear his charges. And Solon was the first of Grece (say some), who by his laws
gave women liberty, by the price of their honestie, to provide for their necessities: A
custom which Heroditus reporteth to have been entertained before him in diverse
commonwealths. And moreover, what fruit yields this careful vexation? For, what justice
soever be in this passion, yet should we note whether it harrie us unto our profit or no.
Thinkes any man that he can ring them by his industrie?
Pone seram, cohibe; sed quis custodiet ipsos
Custodes? cauta est, et ab illis incipit uxor. -- Juven. Sat. vi. 247.
Keepe her with locke and key: but from her who shall keep
Her Keepers? She begins with them, her wits so deepe.
What advantage sufficeth them not in this so skilfull age? Curiosity is everywhere
vicious, but herein pernicious. It is meere folly for one to seek to be resolved of a doubt,
or search into a mischief, for which there is no remedie, but makes it worse, but festereth
the same: the reproach whereof is increased, and chiefely published by jealousie; and the
revenge whereof does more wound and disgrace our children then it helpeth or graceth us.
You waste away and die in pursuit of so concealed a mysterie, of so obscure a
verification. Whereunto how piteously have they arrived, who in my time have attained
their purpose? If the accuser or intelligencer present not withall the remedy and his
assistance, his office is injurious, his intelligence harmefull, and which better deserveth a
stabbe then does a lie. We flout him no less that toileth to prevent it, then laugh at him
that is a Cuckold and knowes it not. The character of cuckoldrie is perpetuall; on whom it
once fastneth it holdeth for ever. The punishment bewraieth it more then the fault. It is a
goodly sight to our private misfortunes from out the shadow of oblivion or the dungeon of
doubt, for to blazon and proclaime them on Tragicall Stages; and misfortunes which pinch
us not, but by relation. For (as the saying is) she is a good wife, and that a good marriage,

not that is so indeed, but whereof no man speaks. We ought to be wittly-wary to avoid
this irksome, this tedious and unprofitable knowledge. The Romans were accustomed,
when they returned from any journey, to send home before, and give their wives notice of
their coming, that so they might not surprise them. And therefore has a certain nation
instituted the Priest to open the way unto the Bridegroome, on the wedding day, thereby to
take from him the doubt and curiosity of searching in this first attempt, whether she come
a pure virgin to him, or be broken and tainted with any former love. But the world speaks
of it. I know a hundred Cockolds which are so honestly and little undecently. An honest
man and a gallant spirit is moaned, but not disesteemed by it. Cause your virtue to
suppresse your mishap, that honest-minded men may blame the occasion and curse the
cause; that he which offends you may tremble with only thinking of it. And, moreover,
what man is scot-free, or who is not spoken of in this sense, from the meanest unto the
highest?
------tot qui legionibus imperitavit,
Et melior quam to multis fuit, improbe, rebus. -- Lucr. iii. 1070.
He that so many bands of men commanded,
Thy better much, sir knave, wasmuch like branded.
Seest then not how many honest men, even in your presence, are spoken of and touched
with this reproach? Imagine then they will be as bold with you, and say as much of you
else-where. For no man is spared. And even Ladies will scoffe and prattle of it. And what
do they now adaies more willingly flout at, then at any well composed and peaceable
mariage? There is none of you all but has made one Cuckold or other. Now nature stood
ever on this point, Kæ me Ile kæ you, and ever ready to be even alwaies on
recompences and vicissitude of things, and to give as good as one brings. The long-
continued frequence of this accident should by this time have seasoned the bitter taste
thereof: It is almost become a custom. Oh miserable passion, which has also this
mischief, to be incommunicable.
Fors etiam nostris invidit quæstibus aures. -- Catul. her. Argon. 170.
Fortune ev’n ears envied,
To hear us when we cried.
For to what friend dare you entrust your grievances, who, if he laugh not at them, will
not make use of them, as a direction and instruction to take a share of the quarie or bootie
to himself? As well the sowrenesse and inconveniences, as the sweetness and pleasures
incident to mariage, are secretly concealed by the wiser sort. And amongst other
importunate conditions belonging to wedlocke, this one, unto a babling fellow as I am, is
of the chiefest; that tyrannous custom makes it uncomely and hurtful for a man to

communicate with any one all he knowes and thinkes of it. To give women advice to
distaste them from jealousies were but time lost or labor spent in vain.Their essence is
so infected with suspicion, with vanity and curiosity, that we may not hope to cure them
by any lawfull meane. They often recover of this infirmitie by a form of health, much
more to be feared then the disease itself. For even as some inchantment cannot ridde
away an evil but with laying it on another, so when they lose it, they transferre and
bestow this maladie on their husbands. And to say truth, I wot not whether a man can
endure anything at their hands worse then jealousie; of all their conditions it is most
dangerous, as the head of all their members. Pittacus said, that ’every man had one
imperfection or other, his wives curst pate was his;’ and but for that, he should esteeme
himself most happy. It must needs be a weightie inconvenience, wherewith so just, so
wise and worthy a man, felt the state of his whole life distempered: what shall we petie
fellowes do then? The Senate of Marceille had reason to grant and enroll his request who
demanded leave to kill himself, thereby to free and exempt himself from his wives
tempestuous scolding humor; for it is an evil that is never cleane rid away but by
removing the whole peece: and has no other composition of worth, but flight or
sufferance; both too-too hard, God knowes. And in my conceit, he understood it right that
said, a good mariage might be made betweene a blinde woman and a deafe man. Let us
also take heed, lest this great and violent strictnesse of obligation we enjoine them,
produce not two effects contrary to our end: that is to wit, to set an edge upon their suiters
stomacks, and make women more easy to yield. For, as concerning the first point,
enhancing the price of the place, we raise the price and endeare the desire of the
conquest. Might it not be Venus herself, who so cunningly enhanced the market of her
ware by the brokage or pandarizing of the laws? knowing how sottish and tasteless a
delight it is, were it not enabled by opinion and endeared by dearnes. To conclude, it is all
but hogges flesh, varied by sauce, as said a roguish Flaminius his hoast. Cupid is a roguish
God; his sport is to wrestle with devotion and to contend with justice. It is his glory, that
his power checketh and copes all other might, and that all other rules give place to his.
Materiam culpæ prosequiturque suæ. -- Ovid. Trist. iv. El. i. 34.
He prosecutes the ground,
Where he is faulty found.
And as for the second point; should we not be less Cuckolds if we less feared to be
so; according to womens conditions: whom inhibition inciteth, and restraint inviteth.
Ubi velis nolunt, ubi nolis volunt ultro: -- Ter. Eunuc. act. iv. sc. 6.
They will not when you will,
When you will not, they will;

Concessa pudet ire via. -- Lucan. ii. 445.
They are asham’d to pass
The way that granted was.
What better interpretation can we find concerning Messalinas demeanor? In the
beginning she made her silly husband Cuckold secretly and by stealth (as the fashion is)
but perceiving how uncontrolled and easily she went on with her matches, by reason of
the stupidity that possessed him, she presently contemned and forsooke that course, and
began openly to make love, to avouch her servants, to entertaine and favor them in open
view of all men; and would have him take notice of it, and seem to be distasted with it:
but the silly gull and senselesse coxcombe awaked not for all this, and by his over-base
facility, by which he seemed to authorize and legitimate her humors, yielding her
pleasures weerish, and her amours tastelesse: what did she? Being the wife of an
Emperor, lustie in health and living; and where? In Rome, on the worlds chief theater, at
high noone-day, at a stately feast, in a public ceremony; and which is more, with one
Silius, whom long time before she had freely enjoied, she was solemnly maried one day
that her husband was out of the City. Seemes it not that she took a direct course to
become chaste, by the retchlesnesse of her husband? or that she sought another husband,
who by jealousie might whet her appetite, and who insisting might incite her? But the first
difficultie she met with was also the last. The drowzie beast rouzed himself and suddenly
started up. One has often the worst bargaines at the hands of such sluggish logger heads.
I have seen by experience, that this extreme patience or long-sufferance, if it once come
to be dissolved, produces most bitter and outragious revenges: for, taking fire all at once,
choller and fury hudling all together, becomming one confused chaos, clattereth foorth
their violent effects at the first charge.
Irarumque omnes effundit habenas. -- Virg. Æn. xii. 499.
It quite lets loose the raine,
That anger should restraine.
He caused both her and a great number of her instruments and abettors to be put to death;
indeed such as could not do withall, and whom by force of whipping she had allured to her
adulterous bed. What Virgill says of Venus and Vulcan, Lucretius had more sutably said it
of a secretly-stolne enjoying betweene her and Mars,
-----belli fera munera Mavors
Armipotens regit, in gremium qui sæpe tuum se
Reiicit, æterno devinctus vulnere amoris:
Pascit amore avidos inhians in te Dea visus,
Eque tuo endet resupini spiritus ore:

Hunc tu Diva tuo recubantem corpore sancto
Circumfusa super, suaveis ex ore loquelas Funde. -- Lucret. i. 33.
Mars, mighty arm’d, rules the fierce feats of arms,
Yet often casts himself into thine arms,
Oblig’d thereto by endlesse wounds of love,
Gaping on you feeds greedy sight with love,
His breath hangs at your mouth who upward lies,
Goddesse you circling him, while he so lies,
With your celestiall body, speeches sweet
Powre from your mouth (as any Nectar sweet).
When I consider this, reiicit, pascit, inhians, molli, fovet, medullas, labefacta, pendet,
percurrit, and this noble circumfusa, mother of gentle infusus, I am vexed at these small
points and verball allusions, which since have sprung up. To those well-meaning people
there needed no sharpe encounter or witty equivocation: their speech is altogether full and
massie, with a natural and constant vigor: they are all epigram, not only tail, but head,
stomacke, and feet. There is nothing forced, nothing wrested, nothing limping; all
marcheth with like tenour. Contextus totus virilis est, non sunt circa flosculos occupati.
The whole composition or text is manly, they are not bebusied about Rhetorike flowers.
This is not a soft quaint eloquence, and only without offence; it is sinnowie, materiall, and
solid; not so much delighting, as filling and ravishing, and ravisheth most the strongest
wits, the wittiest conceits. When I behold these gallant formes of expressing, so lively, so
nimble, so deepe, I say not this is to speak well, but to think well. It is the quaintness or
livelinesse of the conceit that elevateth and puffes up the words. Pectus est quod disertum
facit: ’It is a mans own brest that makes him eloquent.’ Our people terme judgement,
language; and full conceptions, fine words. This pourtraiture is directed not so much by
the hands dexterity as by having the object more lively printed in the mind. Gallus
speaks plainly because he conceiveth plainly. Horace is not pleased with a sleight or
superficiall expressing, it would betray him; he seeth more clear and further into matters:
his spirit pickes and ransaketh the whole store of words and figures, to show and present
himself; and he must have them more then ordinary, as his conceit is beyond ordinary.
Plutarch says that he discerned the Latine tongue by things. Here likewise the sense
enlighteneth and produces the words: no longer windy or spongy, but of flesh and bone.
They signifie more then they utter. Even weake ones show some image of this. For, in
Italie, I spake what I listed in ordinary discourses, but in more serious and pithy I durst not
have dared to trust to an Idiome which I could not winde or turn beyond it’s common
grace or vulgar bias. I will be able to adde and use in it somewhat of my own. The
managing and emploiment of good wits endeareth and gives grace unto a tongue: not so
much innovating as filling the same with more forcible and diverse services, wresting,
straining and enfolding it. They bring no words unto it, but enrich their own, waigh-
down and cramme-in their signification and custom; teaching it unwonted motions; but
wisely and ingenuously. Which skill how little it is given to all, may plainly be discerned

by most of our modern French Writers. They are over-bold and scornefull, to shunne the
common trodden path: but want of invention and lacke of discretion looseth them. There
is nothing to be seen in them but a miserable strained affectation of strange Inke-pot
termes; harsh, cold and absurd disguisements, which in stead of raising, pull down the
matter. So they may gallantize and flush it in novelties they care not for efficacie. To take
hold of a new far-fetcht word, they neglect the usual, which often are more significant,
forcible and sinnowie. I find sufficient store of stuffs in our language, but some defect of
fashion. For there is nothing but could be framed of our Hunters gibbrish words or strange
phrases, and of our Warriours peculiar tearmes; a fruitfull and rich soile to borrow of. And
as hearbes and trees are bettered and fortified by being trans-planted, so formes of speach
are embellished and graced by variation. I find it sufficiently plenteous, but not
sufficiently plyable and vigorous. It commonly faileth and shrinketh under a pithy and
powerfull conception. If your march therein be far extended, you often feel it droope and
languish under you, unto whose default the Latine does now and then present his helping
hand, and the Greeke to some others. By some of these words which I have culled out, we
more hardly perceive the Energie or effectuall operation of them, forasmuch as use and
frequencie have in some sort abased the grace and made their beauty vulgar. As in our
ordinary language we shall sometimes meete with excellent phrases and quaint metaphors,
whose blithenesse fadeth through age, and colour is tarnish by too common using them.
But that does nothing distaste those of sound judgement, nor derogate from the glory of
those ancient Authors, who, as it is likely, were the first that brought these words into
luster, and raised them to that strain. The sciences handle this over finely with an
artificiall manner, and different from the vulgar and natural form. My Page makes love,
and understands it feelingly; Read Leon Hebræus or Ficinus unto him; you speak of him,
of his thoughts and of his actions, yet understands he nothing what you meane. I nor
acknowledge nor discerne in Aristotle the most part of my ordinary motions. They are
clothed with other robes, and shrouded under other vestures for the use of Academicall
schooles. God send them well to speed; but were I of the trade, I would naturalize Arte as
much as they Artize nature. [Farewell,] Benbo and Equicola. When I write I can well omit
the company, and spare the remembrance of books; for fear they interrupt my form.
And in truth good Authours deject me too-too much, and quaile my courage. I willingly
imitate that Painter who, having bungler-like drawne and fondly represented some Cockes
forbad his boies to suffer any live Cocke to come into his shop. And to give my self some
luster or grace have rather neede of some of Antinonides the Musicians invention; who,
when he was to play any musick , gave order that before or after him, some other bad
musicians should cloy and surfet his auditory. But I can very hardly be without Plutark, he
is so universall and so full, that upon all occasions, and whatsoever extravagant subject
you have undertaken, he intrudeth himself into your work, and gently reacheth you a
helpe-affording hand, fraught with rare embelishments and inexhaustible of precious
riches. It spights me that he is so much exposed unto the pillage of those which haunt him.
He can no sooner come in my sight, or if I cast but glance upon him, but I pull some legge
or wing from him. For this my dissignement, it much fitteth my purpose that I write in
my own house, in a wild country, where no man belpeth or releeveth me; where I

converse with no body that understands the Latine of his Pater noster, and as little of
French. I should no doubt have done it better else where, but then the work had been
less mine, whose principal drift and perfection is to be exactly mine. I could mend an
accidentall error, whereof I abound in mine unwary course; but it were a kind of treason
to remove the imperfections from me, which in me are ordinary and constant. When any
body else, or my self have said unto my self: Thou art too full of figures or allegories;
here is a word meerely-bred Gaskoyne; that’s a dangerous phrase: (I refuse none that are
used in the frequented streets of France, those that will combat use and custom by the
strict rules of Grammar do but jest) there’s an ignorant discourse, that’s a paradoxicall
relation: or there’s a foolish conceit: you doest often but dally: one will think you
speakest in earnest what you hast but spoken in jest. Yea (say I), but I correct unadvised,
not customarie errors. Speake I not so every where? Doe I not lively display my self?
That sufficeth: I have my will: All the world may know me by my book, and my book
by me: but I am of an Apish and imitating condition. When I medled with making of
verses (and I never made any but in Latine), they evidently accused the poet I came last
from reading. And of my first Essayes, some taste a little of the stranger. At Paris I speak
somewhat otherwise then at Montaigne. Whom I behold with attention, does easily convay
and imprint something of his in me. What I heedily consider, the same I usurpe: a foolish
countenance, a crabbed looke, a ridiculous manner of speach. And vices more: because
they pricke me, they take fast hold upon me, and leave nice not, unless I shake them
off. I have more often been heard to sweare by imitation then by complexion. Oh
injurious and dead-killing imitation: like that of those huge in greatness and matchlesse
in strength Apes, which Alexander met withall in a certain part of India: which otherwise
it had been hard to vanquish. But by this their inclination to counterfeit whatsoever they
saw done, they afforded the means. For, thereby the Hunters learn’t in their sight to put
on shooes, and tie them with many strings and knots; to dresse their heads with diverse
strange attires, full of sliding-knots and dissemblingly to rub their eyes with Glew or Bird-
lime; so did those silly harmlesse beasts indiscreetly employ their Apish disposition. They
ensnared, glewed, entrameled, haltred and shackled themselves. That other faculty of
Extempore and wittily representing the gestures and words of another, which often
causeth sport and breedeth admiring, is no more in me then in a blocke. When I sweare
after my own fashion, it is only by God; the directest of all oathes. They report that
Socrates swore by a Dogge; Zeno by that interjection (now a days used amongst the
Italies) Capari; and Pithagoras by water and by aire. I am so apt at unawares to entertaine
these superficiall impressions, that if but for three days together I use myself to speak
to any Prince with your Grace or your Highnesse, for eight days after I so forget myself,
that I shall still use them for your Honour or your Worship: and what I am wont to speak
in sport or jest, the next day after I shall speak in good serious earnest. Therefore in
writing I assume more unwillingly much beaten arguments, for fear I handle them at
others charges. All arguments are likewise fertile to me. I take them upon any trifle. And I
pray God this were not under-taken by the commandement of a mind as fleeting. Let me
begin with that likes me best, for all matters are linked one to another. But my conceit
displeaseth me, for somuch as it commonly produces most foolish dotages from deepest

studies, and such as content me on a suddaine, and when I least looke for them; which as
fast fleete away, wanting at that instant some holde fast. On horse-backe, at the table, in
my bed; but most on horse-backe, where my amplest meditations and my farthest reaching
conceits are. My speach is somewhat nicely jealous of attention and silence; if I be in any
earnest talk, who interrupteth me, cuts me off. In travell, even the necessity of waies
breakes off discourses. Besides that I most commonly travell without company, which is a
great helpe for continued reasonings: whereby I have sufficient leisure to entertaine my
self. I thereby have that success I have in dreames: In dreaming I commend them to my
memory (for what I dream I do it willingly), but the next morning I can well call to
mind what colour they were of, whether blith, sad or strange; but what in substance, the
more I labor to find out, the more I overwhelme them in oblivion. So of casual and
unpremeditated conceits that come into my braine, nought but a vain image of them
remaineth in my memory; so much only as sufficeth unprofitably to make me chafe,
spight and fret in pursuite of them. Well, then, leaving bookes aside, and speaking more
materially and simply, when all is done I find that love is nothing else but an insatiate
thirst of enjoying a greedily desired subject. Nor Venus that good huswife, other then a
tickling delight of emptying ones seminary vessels: as is the pleasure which nature gives
us to discharge other parts, which becomes faulty by immoderation and defective by
indiscretion. To Socrates love is an appetite of generation by the mediation of beauty.
Now, considering oftentimes the ridiculous tickling or titilation of this pleasure, the
absurd giddy, and hare-braind motions wherwith it tosseth Zeno and agitates Cratippus:
that unadvised rage, that furious and with cruelty enflamed visage in loves lustfull and
sweetest effects: and then a grave, stern, severe, surly countenance in so fond-fond an
action, that one has pell-mell lodged our joyes and filthes together, and that the
supremest voluptuous-nesse both ravisheth and plaineth, as does sorrow: I believe that
which Plato saies to be true, that man was made by the Gods for them to toy and play
withall.
----- quænam ista jocandi Sæuitia?
What cruelty is this, so set on jesting is?
And that Nature in mockery left us the most troublesome of our actions, the most
common: thereby to equall us, and without distinction to set the foolish and the wise, us
and beasts all in one rank; no barrel better Hering. When I imagine the most
contemplative and discreetly-wise-men in these tearmes in that humor, I hold him for a
cozener, for a cheater to seem either studiously contemplative or discreetly wise. It is the
foulenesse of the peacockes feete which does abate his pride, and stoop his gloating-eyed
tayle:
-----ridentem dicere verum,
Quid vetat? -- Hor. Ser. i. Sat. ii. 24.

What should forbid you sooth to say,
Yet be as mery as we may.
Those which in playes refuse serious opinions, do as one reporteth, like unto him who
dreadeth to adore the image of a Saint, if it want a cover, an apr one or a tabernacle. We
feed full well and drinke like beasts; but they are not actions that hinder the offices of our
mind. In those we hold good our advantage over them, whereas this brings each other
thought under subjection, and by its imperious authority makes brutish and dulleth all
Platoes philosophy and divinity of it. In all other things you may observe decorum and
maintaine some decency: all other operations admit some rules of honesty; this cannot
only be imagined, but vicious or ridiculous. See whether for example sake you can but
find a wise or discreete proceeding in it. Alexander said that he knew himself mortal
chiefly by this action and by sleeping; sleepe does stifle and suppresseth the faculties of
our soul, and that both [devoureth] and dissipates them. Surely it is an argument not
only of our originall corruption, but a badge of our vanity and deformity. On the one side
nature urgeth us unto it; having thereunto combined, indeed fastned the most noble, the most
profitable, and the most sensually-pleasing of all her functions; and on the other suffereth
us to accuse, to condemne and to shunne it, as insolent, as dishonest and as lewde, to blush
at it, and allow, indeed to commend abstinence. Are not we most brutish to terme that
work beastly which begets and which maketh us? Most people have concurred in diverse
ceremonies of religion, as sacrifices, luminaries, fastings, incensings, offrings, and
amongst others, in condemnation of this action. All opinions agree in that, besides the so
far-extended use of circumcision. We have perhaps reason to blame ourselves for
making so foolish a production as man, and to entitle both the deed and parts thereto
belonging shamefull (mine are properly so at this instant). The Esseniens, of whom Plinie
speaks, maintained themselves a long time without nurces or swathling clothes by the
arrival of strangers that came to their shoares, who seconding their foolish humor, did often
visit them. A whole nation hazarding rather to consume then engage themselves to
feminine embracements, and rather lose the succession of all men then forge one. They
report that Zeno never dealt with woman but once in all his life, which he did for civility,
least he should over obstinately seem to contemne the sex. Each one avoideth to see a
man borne, but all run hastily to see him dye. To destroy him we seek a spacious field
and a full light, but to construct him we hide ourselves in some darke corner and work as
close as we may. It is our dutie to conceal ourselves in making him; it is our glory, and
the originall of many vertues to destroy him being framed. The one is a manifest injury,
the other a greater favor, for Aristotle says that in a certain phrase, where he was borne,
to bonifie or benefit was as much to say as to kill one. The Athenians, to equall the
disgrace of these two actions, being to cleanse the Ile of Delos and justify themselves unto
Apollo forbad within that precinct all burial and births, Nostri nosmet poenitet; (Ter.
Phor.) ’We are weary of ourselves.’ There are some nations that when they are eating they
cover themselves. I know a Lady (indeed one of the greatest) who is of opinion that to chew
is an unseemly thing, which much empaireth their grace and beauty, and therefore by her

will she never comes abroad with an appetite; And a man that cannot endure one should
see him eate, and shunneth all company more when he filleth then when he emptieth
himself. In the Turkish Empire there are many who to excel the rest will not be seen
when they are feeding, and who make but one meale in a weeke, who mangle their face
and cut their limbs, and who never speak to anybody, who think to honor their nature
by disnaturing themselves: oh fantastic people that prize themselves by their contempt
and mend [by] their empairing. What monstrous beast is this that maks himself a horror
to himself, whom his delights displease, who tyes himself unto misfortune? Some there
are that conceal their life,
Exilioque domos et dulcia limina mutant, -- Virg. Georg. ii. 511.
They change for banishment,
The places that might best content,
and steale it from the sight of other men; That eschew health and shunne mirth as hateful
qualities and harmefull. Not only diverse Sects but many people curse their birth and
blesse their death. Some there be that abborre the glorious Sunne and adore the hidious
darkenesse. We are not ingenious but to our own vexation; It is the true foode of our
spirits force; a dangerous and most unruly implement.
O miseri quorum gaudia crimen habent. -- Cor. Gal. El. i. 188.
O miserable they, whose joyes in fault we lay.
Alas, poore silly man, you hast but too-too necessary and unavoidable incommodities,
without increasing them by thine own invention, and are sufficiently wretched of
condition without any arte; you aboundest in reall and essentiall deformities, and need not
forge any by imagination. Doest you find your self too well at ease, unless the moiety of
thine ease molest you? Findest you to have supplied or discharged al necessary offices
wherto nature engageth you, and that she is idle in you, if you bind not your self unto
new offices? Thou fearest not to offend her universall and undoubted laws, and art
mooved at thine own partiall and fantastic ones. And by how much more particular,
uncertaine, and contradicted they are, the more endevours you bestowest that way. The
positive orders of your parish tie you, those of the world do nothing concerne you. Runne
but a little over the examples of this consideration, your life is full of them. The verses of
these two poets, handling lasciviousnesse so sparingly and so discreetly as they do in my
conceit, seem to discover and display it nearer; ladies cover their bosome with networke,
priests many sacred things with a veil, and painters shadow their workes to give them the
more luster and to adde more grace unto them. And they say that the streakes of the Sunne
and force of the winde are much more violent by reflection then by a direct line. The
Egyptian answered him wisely that asked him what he had hidden under his cloake? ’It is,’

quoth he, ’hidden under my cloake that you mayest not know what it is.’ But there are
certain other things which men conceal to show them. Hear this fellow more open:
Et nudam pressi corpus ad usque meum. -- Ovid. Am. i. El. v. 24.
My body I applide, Even to her naked side.
Methinkes he baffles me. Let Martiall at his pleasure tuck-up Venus he makes her not by
much appeare so wholly. He that speaks all he knows, does cloy and distaste us. Who
feareth to express himself, leadeth our conceite to imagine more then happily he
conceiveth. There is treason in this kind of modesty, and chiefly as these do in opening us
so fair a path unto imagination. Both the action and description should taste of
purloyning. The love of the Spaniards and of the Italians pleaseth me; by how much more
respective and fearefull it is, the more nicely close and closely nice it is, I wot not who in
ancient time wished his throat were as long as a Cranes neck that so he might the longer
and more leasurely taste what he swallowed. That wish were more to purpose than this
suddaine and violent pleasure: Namely, in such natures as mine, who am faulty in
suddainenesse. To stay her fleeting and delay her with preambles, with them all serveth
for favor, all is construed to be a recompence, a wink, a cast of the eye, a bowing, a
word, or a signe, a becke is as good as a Dew guard. He that could dine with the smoake
of roste-meat, might he not dine at a cheape rate? would he not soone be rich? It is a
passion that commixeth with small store of solid essence, great quantity of doating vanity
and febricitant raving: it must therefore be requited and served with the like. Let us teach
Ladies to know how to prevaile, highly to esteeme themselves, to ammuse, to circumvent
and cozen us. We make our last charge the first; we show ourselves right French men,
ever rash, ever headlong. Wire-drawing their favors and enstalling them by retaile, each
one, even unto miserable old age, findes some listes end, according to his worth and
merite. He who has no jovissance but in enjoying, who shootes not but to hit the marke,
who loves not hunting but for the prey; it belongs not to him to entermedle with our
School. The more steps and degrees there are, the more delight and honor is there on
the top. We should be pleased to be brought unto it as unto stately Pallaces by diverse
porches, severall passages, long and pleasant Galleries, and well contrived turnings. This
dispensation would in the end redound to our benefite; we should stay on it, and longer
love to lie at Racke and Manger, for these snatches and away marre the grace of it. Take
away hope and desire, we grow faint in our courses, we come but lagging after. Our
mastery and absolute possession is infinitely to be feared of them. After they have wholy
yielded themselves to the mercy of our faith and constancy, they have hazarded
something. They are rare and difficult vertues: so soone as they are ours, we are no longer
theirs.
-----postquam cupidæ mentis satiata libido est.
Verba nihil metuere, nihil perjuria curant. -- Catul. Arg. v. 147.

The lust of greedy mind once satisfied,
They fear no words; nor reke othes falsified.
And Thrasonides, a young Greek, was so religiously amorous of his love, that having
after much suit gained his mistris hart and favor, he refused to enjoy her, least by that
jovissance he might or quench, or satisfie, or languish that burning flame and restlesse
heat wherwith he gloried, and so pleasingly fed himself. Things far fetcht and dearly
bought are good for Ladyes. It is the dear price makes viands savour the better. See but
how the form of salutations, which is peculiar unto our nation, does by its facility
bastardize the grace of kisses, which Socrates says, to be of that consequence, waight and
danger, to ravish and steale our hearts. It is an unpleasing and injurious custom unto
Ladies, that they must afford their lips to any man that has but three Lackies following
him, how unhandsome and lothsome soever he be:
Cuius livida naribus caninis,
Dependet glacies, rigetque barba?
Centum occurrere malo culilingis. -- Mart. v. Epig. xciv. 10.
From whose dog-nosthrils black-blew Ise depends,
Whose beard frost-hardned stands on bristled ends, &amp;c.
Nor do we ourselves gain much by it: for as the world is divided into foure parts, so for
foure fair ones we must kisse fiftie foul: and to a nice or tender stomack, as are those of
mine age, one ill kisse does, surpay one good. In Italy they are passionate and languishing
sutors to very common and mercinarie women; and thus they defend and excuse
themselves, saying, That even in enjoying there be certain degrees, and that by humble
services they will endeavor to obtaine that which is the most absolutely perfect. They sell
but their bodyes, their willes cannot be put to sale; that is too free, and too much its own.
So say these, that it is the will they attempt, and they have reason: It is the will one must
serve and most solicite. I abhor to imagine mine, a body voide of affection. And me
seems this frenzie has some affinity with that boyes foolish humor, who for pure love
would wantonize with that fayre Image of Venus which Praxiteles had made; or of the
furious Egyptian who lusted after a dead womans corpes, which he was embaulming and
stitching up: which was the occasion of the lawe that afterward was made in Egypt, that
the bodies of fair, young, and nobly borne women should be kept three dayes before they
should be delivered into the hands of those who had the charge to provide for their
funerals and burials. Periander did more miraculously, who extended his conjugall
affection (more regular and lawfull) unto the enjoying of Melissa his deceased wife.
Seemes it not to be a lunatique humor in the Moone, being otherwise unable to enjoy
Endimion her favorite darling, to lull him in a sweet slumber for many moneths together;
and feed hirselfe with the jovissance of a boye, that stirred not but in a dreame? I say
likewise, that a man loves a body without a soul when he loves a body without his

consent and desire. All enjoyings are not likewise. There are some hecticke, faint and
languishing ones. A thousand causes, besides affection and good will, may obtaine us this
graunt of women. It is no sufficient testimony of true affection: therein may lurke treason,
as elsewhere: they sometime go but faintly to work, and as they say with one buttocke
Tanquam thura merumque parent; -- Ibid. xi. Epi. civ. 12.
As though they did dispense
Pure Wine and Frankincense.
Absentem marmoreamve putes. -- Ibid. Epig. lxi. 8.
Of Marble you would think she were,
Or that she were not present there.
I knowe some that would rather lend that then their coach, and who empart not
themselves, but that way: you must also marke whether your company pleaseth them for
some other respect or for that end only as of a lustie-strong grome of a stable: as also in
what rank and at what rate you are there lodged or valued;
-----tibi si datur uni
Quo lapide illa diem candidiore notet. -- Catul. Eleg. iv. 147.
If it afforded be to you alone,
Where by she counts that day of all dayes one.
What if she eate your bread with the sauce of a more pleasing imagination?
Te tenet, absentes alios suspirat amores. -- Tibul. iv. El. v. 11.
Thee she retaines, yet sigheth she
For other loves that absent be.
What? have we not seen some in our dayes to have made use of this action for the
execution of a most horrible revenge, by that means murthering and empoysoning (as
one did) a very honest woman? such as know Italie will never wonder if for this subject I
seek for no examples elsewhere. For the said nation may in that point be termed Regent
of the world. They have commonly more fair women, and fewer foul then we; but in
rare and excellent beauties I think we match them. The like I judge of their wits, of the
vulgar sort they have evidently many more. Blockishnes is without all comparison more
rare amongst them: but for singular wits, and of the highest pitch, we are no whit behinde
them. Were I to extend this comparison, I might (me thinkes) say, touching valor, that on

the other side, it is in regard of them popular and natural amongst us: but in their hands
one may sometimes find it so compleate and vigorous, that it exceedeth all the most
forcible examples we have of it. The mariages of that countrie are in this somewhat
defective. Their custom does generally impose so severe observances and slavish laws
upon wives, that the remotest acquaintance with a stranger is amongst them as capital as
the nearest. Which law causeth that all aproaches prove necessarily substanciall; and
seeing all commeth to one reckoning with them, they have an easy choise: and have they
broken down their hedges? Beleeve it, they will have fire: Luxuria ipsis vinculis, sicut
fera bestia, irritata, deinde emissa: ’Luxurie is like a wild beast, first made fiercer with
tying, and then let loose.’ They must have the reynes given them a little.
Vidi ego nuper equum contra sua frena tenacem
Ore reluctante fulminis ire modo. -- Ovid. Am. iii. El. iv. 13.
I saw, spite of his bit, a resty colt,
Runne head-strong headlong like a thunder-bolt.
They allay the desire of company by giving it some liberty. It is a commendable custom
with our nation that our children are entertained in noble houses there, as in a schoole of
nobility to be trained and b rought up as Pages. And ’tis said to be a kind of discourtesy
to refuse it a gentleman. I have observed (for so many houses so many severall formes and
orders) that such Ladies as have gone about to give their waiting women the most austere
rules, have not had the best successes. There is required more then ordinary moderation: a
great part of their government must be left to the conduct of their discretion: For, when
all comes to all, no discipline can bridle them in each point. True it is that she who
escapeth safe and unpolluted from out the schoole of fredome, gives more confidence of
hirselfe than she who commeth sound out of the schoole of severity and restraint.
Our forefathers framed their daughters countenances unto shamefastnesse and fear
(their inclinations and desires alwaies likewise), we unto assurance. We understand not the
matter. That belongeth to the Sarmatian wenches, who by their laws may lie with no
man, except with their own hands they have before killed another man in war. To me
that have no right but by the ears, it sufficeth if they retaine me to be of their counsell,
following the priviledge of mine age, I then advise both them and us to embrace
abstinence, but if this season be too much against it, at least modesty and discretion. For
as Aristippus (speaking to some young men who blushed to see him go into a bawdy
house) said, ’The fault was not in entring, but in not coming out again.’ She that will not
exempt her conscience, let her exempt her name; though the substance be not of worth, yet
let the apparance hold still good. I love gradation and prolonging in the distribution of
their favors. Plato sheweth that in all kindes of love, facility and readinesse is forbidden
to defendants. ’Tis a trick of greedinesse which it behoveth them to cloake with their arte,
so rashly and foolhardily to yield themselves in their distributions of favors, holding a
and moderate course, they much better deceive our desires and conceal theirs. Let them
ever be flying before us: I meane even those that intend to be overtaken as the Scithians

are wont, though they seem to run away they heate us more, and sooner put us to route.
Verily according to the lawe which nature gives them, it is not fit for them to will and
desire: their part is to bear, to obey, and to consent. Therefore has nature bestowed a
perpetual capacity; on us a seld and uncertaine ability. They have alwaies their hour, that
they may ever be ready to let us enter. And whereas she has willed our appetites should
make apparant show and declaration, she caused theirs to be concealed and inward: and
has furnished them with parts unfit for ostentation, and only for defense. Such prankes
as this we must leave to the Amazonian liberty. Alexander the great, marching through
Hircania, Thalestris, Queen of the Amazones, came to meet him with thre hundred lances
of her sex, all well mounted and compleately armed, having left the residue of a great
army, that followed her, beyond the neighbouring mountaines. And thus aloud, that all
might hear, she bespake him: That the far-resounding fame of his victories and
matchles valor had brought her thither to see him, and to offer him her means and forces
for the advancing and furthering of his enterprises. And finding him so fair, so young and
strong, she, who was perfectly accomplished in all his qualities, advised him to lie with
her, that so there might be borne of the most valiant woman in the world, and only valiant
man then living, some great and rare creature for posterity. Alexander thanked her for the
rest, but to take leisure for her last demands accomplishment, he staide thirteene days in
that place, during which he revelled with as much glee, and feasted with as great jollity, as
possibly could be devised, in honor and favor of so courageous a Princess. We are
well-nigh in all things parciall and corrupted Judges of their action, as no doubt they are of
ours. I allow of truth as well when it hurts me as when it helps me. It is a foul disorder,
that so often urgeth them unto change, and hinders them from setting their affection on
any one subject: as we see in this Goddesse, to whom they impute so many changes and
severall friends. But withall it is against the nature of love not to be violent, and against
the condition of violence to be constant. And those who wonder at it exclaime it against it,
and in women search for the causes of this infirmity, as incredible and unnaturall: why see
they not how often without any amazement and exclaiming, themselves are possessed and
infected with it? I[t] might happily seem more strange to find any constant stay in them.
It is not a passion meerely corporeall. If no end be found in coveteousnesse, nor limit in
ambition, assure your self there is nor end nor limit in letchery. It yet continueth after
saciety: nor can any man prescribe it or end or constant satisfaction. It ever goeth on
beyond its possession, beyond it’s bounds. And if constancy be perhaps in some sort
more pardonable in them then in us, They may readily alleage against us our ready
inclination unto daily variety and new ware; And secondly alleage without us, that they
buy a pigge in a poake. Ione, Queene of Naples caused Andreosse her first husband to be
strangled and hanged out of the bars of his window, with a corde of Silke and golde
woven with her own hands; because in bed business she found neither his members nor
endevours answerable the hope she had conceived of him, by viewing his stature, beauty,
youth, and disposition, by which she had formerly been surprised and abused. That
action has in it more violence then passion; so that on their part at least necessity is ever
provided for: on our behalfe it may happen otherwise. Therefore Plato by his laws did
very wisely establish, that before marriages, the better to decide its opportunity, competent

Judges might be appointed to make view of young men which pretended the same, all
naked: and of maidens but to the waste: in making trial of us, they happily find us not
worthy their choise:
Experta latus, madidoque simillima loro
Inguina, nec lassa stare coacta manu
Deserit imbelles thalamos. -- Marti. vii. Epig. lvii. 3.
It is not sufficient that will keep a lively course: weakenesse and incapacity may lawfully
breake wedlock:
Et quærendum aliunde foret neruosius illud
Quod posset Zonam soluere virgineam. -- Catul. Eleg. iii. 27.
Why not, and according to measure, an amorous intelligence, more licentious and more
active?
Si blando nequeat superesse labori. -- Virg. Georg. iii. 127.
If it cannot outlast, labor with pleasure past.
But is it not great impudency to bring our imperfections and weakenesse, in place
where we desire to please, and leave good report and commendation behind us? for the
little I now stand in need of,
------ ad unum
Mollis opus.
Unable to hold out, one only busie bout,
I would not importune any one whom I am to reverence.
-----fuge suspicari,
Cuius undenum trepidavit ætas
Claudere lustrum. -- Hor. Car. ii. Od. iv. 22.
Him of suspition clears,
Whom age has brought well neare
To five and fifty yeare.
Nature should have been pleased to have made this age miserable, without making it also

ridiculous. I hate to see one for an inch of wretched vigor, which enflames him but thrice a
week, take-on and swagger as fiercely as if he has some great and lawfull dayes-work in
his belly; a right blast or puffe of winde: and admire his itching, so quick and nimble, all
in a moment to be lubberly squat and benumbed. This appetite should only belong to the
blossom of a prime youth. Trust not unto it, thogh you see it second that indefatigable,
full, constant and swelling heate, that is in you: for truly it will leave you at the best, and
when you shall most stand in neede of it. Send it rather to some tender, irresolute and
ignorant girle, which yet trembleth for fear of the rod, and that will blush at it,
Indum sanguineo veluti violaverit ostro
Si quis ebur, vel mista rubent ubi lilia, multa
Alba rosa. -- Virg. Æn. xii. 67.
As if the Indian Ivory one should taint
With bloody Scarlet-graine, or Lillies paint,
White entermixt with red with Roses enter-spred.
Who can stay until the next morrow, and not die for shame, the disdaine of those love
sparkling eyes, privie to his faintnesse, dastardise and impertinencie:
El taciti fecere tamen conuitia vultus: -- Ovid. Am. i. El. vii. 21.
The face though silent, yet silent upbraydes it:
he never felt the sweet contentment, and the sense-mooving earnestness to have beaten
and tarnished them by the vigorous exercise of an officious and active night. When I have
perceived any of them weary of me, I have not presently accused her lightnes: but made
question whether I had not more reason to quarrell with nature, for handling me so
unlawfully and uncivilly,
Si non longa satis, si non bene mentula crassa:
Nimirum sapiunt videntque paruam
Matronæ quoque mentuiam illibenter, -- Lus. Priap. penul. 1. ibid. viii. 4.
and to my exceeding hurt. Each of my pieces are equally mine, one as another: and no
other does more properly make me a man then this. My whole pourtraiture I universally
owe unto the world. One wisdom and reach of my lesson is all in truth, in liberty, in
essence: disdaining in the catalogue of my true duties, these easy, faint, ordinary and
provinciall rules. All natural; constant and general; whereof civility and ceremony are
daughters, but bastards. We shall easily have the vices of apparance, when we shall have
had those of essence. When we have done with these, we run upon others, if we find
need of running. For there is danger that we devise new offices, to excuse our negligence

toward natural offices, and to confound them. That is so, we see that in places where
faults are bewitchings, bewitchings are but faults. That among nations, where laws of
seemelinesse are more rare and slacke, theprimitive laws of common reason are better
observed: The innumerable multitude of so manifold duties, stifling, languishing and
dispersing our care. The applying of ourselves unto sleight matters, withdraweth us from
such as be just. Oh how easy and plausible a course do these sperficiall men undertake, in
respect of ours. These are but shadowes under which we shroud, and wherwith we pay one
another. But we pay not, but rather heape debt on debt, unto that great and dreadfull judge,
who tucks up our clouts and rags from about our privie parts, and is not squeamish to view
all over, even to our most inward and secret deformities: a beneficiall decencie of our
maidenly bashfulness, could it debar him of this tainted discovery. To conclude, he that
could recover or un-besot man, from so scrupulous and verball a superstition, should not
much prejudice the world. Our life consisteth partly in folly and partly in wisdom. He
that writes of it but reverently and regularly, omits the better moitie of it. I excuse me not
unto my self, and if I did, I would rather excuse my excuses then any fault else of mine: I
excuse my self of certain humors, which in number I hold stronger then those which are
on my side: In consideration of which I will say thus much more (for I desire to please all
men, though it be a hard matter: Esse unum hominem accommodatum ad tantam morum
ac sermonum et voluntatum varietatem: ’That one man should be applyable to so great
variety of manners, speeches and dispositions’) that they are not to blame me, for what I
cause auctorities received and approved of many ages, to utter: and that it is not reason,
they should for want of ryme deny me the dispensation; which ever some of our
churchmen usurpe and enjoy in this season, whereof behold here two, and of the most pert
and cocket amongst them:
Rimula dispeream, ni mono qramma tua est.
Un vit d’amy la contents et bien traicte.
How many others more? I love modesty; nor is it from judgement that I have made choise
of this kind of scandalous speech: ’tis nature has chosen the same for me; I commend it
no more then all formes contrary unto received custom: only I excuse it: and by
circumstances as well general as particular, would qualifie the imputation. Well, let us
proceed. Whence commeth also the usurpation of sovereign auctority, which you assume
unto yourselves, over those that favor you to their cost and prejudice,
Si furtiva dedit nigra munuscula nocte, -- Catul. El. iv. 145.
If she have giv’n by night,
The stolne gift of delight,
that you should immediately invest withall the interest, the coldness and a wedlock
authority? It is a free bargaine, why do you not undertake it on those termes you would

have them to keep? There is no prescription upon voluntarie things. It is against form,
yet it is true that I have in my time managed this match (so far as the nature of it would
allow) with as much conscience as any other whatsoever, and not without some colour of
justice: and have given them no further testimony of mine affection then I sincerely felt:
and have lively displaide unto them the declination, vigor and birth of the same; with the
fits and deferring of it: A man cannot alwayes keep an even pace, nor ever go to it likewise. I
have bin so sparing to promise, that (as I think) I have paid more then either I promised
or was due. They have found me faithfull, even to the service of their inconstancy: I say
an inconstancy avowed, and sometimes multiplied. I never broke with them, as long as I
had any hold, were it but by a threds-end: and whatsoever occasion they have given me by
their ficklenes, I never fell off unto contempt and hatred: for such famliarities, though I
attaine them on most shamefull conditions, yet do they bind me unto some constant good-
will. I have sometime given them a taste of choller and indiscret impatience, upon
occasions of their wiles, sleights, close-convayances, controversies and contestations
betweene us; for, by complexion, I am subject to hastie and rash motions, which often
empeach my traffick, and marre my bargaines, though but meane and of small worth.
Have they desired to essay the liberty of my judgement, I never dissembled to give them
fatherly counsell and biting advise, and showed myself ready to scratch them where they
itched. If I have given them cause to complain of me, it has bin most for finding a love
in me, in respect of our modern fashion, foolishly conscientious. I have religiously kept
my word in things that I might easily have bin dispensed with. They then yielded
sometimes with reputation, and under conditions, which they would easily suffer to be
infringed by the conqueror. I have more then once made pleasure in her greatest efforts
strike saile unto the interest of their honor: and where reason urged me, armed them
against me, so that they guided themselves more safely and severely by my prescriptions,
if they once freely yielded unto them, then they could have done by their own. I have as
much as I could endevored to take on my self the charge and hazard of our appointments,
therby to discharge them from all imputation; and ever contrived our meetings in most
hard, strange and unsuspected manner, to be the less mistrusted, and (in my seeming) the
more accessible. They are opened, especially in those parts where they suppose
themselves most concealed. Things lest feared are lest defended and observed. You may
more securely dare what no man thinks you would dare, which by difficulty becometh
easy. Never had man his approches more impertinently genitale. This way to love is more
according to discipline. But how ridiculous unto our people, and of how small effect, who
better knowes then I? I will not repent me of it: I have no more to lose by the matter.
-----me tabula sacer
Votiva paries, indicat uvida,
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta maris Deo. -- Hor. Car. i. Od. v. 13.
By tables of the vows which I did owe
Fastened thereto the sacred wall does showe;

I have hung up my garments water-wet,
Unto that God whose power on seas is great.
It is now high time to speak plainely of it. But even as to another, I would perhaps say:
My friend you dotest, the love of your times has small affinity with faith and honesty:
-----hæc si tu postules
Ratione certa facere, nihilo plus agas,
Quam si des operam; ut cum ratione insanias. -- Ter. Eunuc. act. i. sc. 1.
If this you would by reason certain make,
You do no more then if the paines you take
To be stark mad, and yet to think it reason fit.
And yet if I were to beginne anew, it should be by the very same path and progresse, how
fruitlesse soever it might proove unto me, Insufficiency and sottishnesse are commendable
in a discommendable action. As much as I separate my self from their humor in that, so
much I approach unto my own. Moreover, I did never suffer my self to be wholly
given over to that sport; I therewith pleased, but forgot not my self. I ever kept that little
understanding and discretion which nature has bestowed on me, for their service and
mine; some motion towards it, but no dotage. My conscience also was engaged therein,
even unto incontinency and excess, but never unto ingratitude, treason, malice, or
cruelty. I bought not the pleasure of this vice at all rates, and was content with its own
and simple cost. Nullum intra se vitium est: (Sen. Epi. xcv.) ’There is no vice contained in
itself.’ I hate almost likewise a crouching and dull lasinesse and a toilesome and thorny
working. The one pincheth, the other dulleth me. I love wounds as much as bruses, and
blood wipes as well as dry-blowes. I had in the practice of this solace, when I was fitter
for it, an even moderation betweene these two extremities. Love is a vigilant, lively, and
blithe agitation: I was neither troubled nor tormented with it; But heated and distempred
by it. There we must make a stay; It is only hurtful unto fooles. A young man demanded
of the Philosopher Panetius, whether it would beseeme a wise man to be in love; Let wise
men alone (quoth he) but for you and me that are not so, it were best not to engage our
selves into so stirring and violent a humor, which makes us slaves to others and
contemptible unto ourselves. He said true, for we ought not entrust a matter so dangerous
unto a mind that has not wherewith to sustain the approaches of it, nor effectually to
quaile the speach of Agesilaus, That wisdom and love cannot live together. It is a vain
occupation (’tis true), unseemely, shamefull and lawlesse: But using it in this manner, I
esteeme it wholsome and fit to rouze a dull spirit and a heavy body: and as a physician
experienced, I would prescribe the same unto a man of my complexion and form, as
soone as any other receipt to keep him awake and in strength, when he is well in years;
and delay him from the gripings of old age. As long as we are but in the suburbes of it,
and that our pulse yet beateth,

Dum nona canines, dum prima et recta senectus,
Dum superest Lachesi quod torqueat, et pedibus me
Porto meis, nullo dextram subeunte bacillo. -- Juven. Sat. iii. 26.
While hoarie haires are new, and ould-age fresh and straight,
While Lachesis has yet to spin, while I my waight
Beare on my feete, and stand, without staffe in my hand.
We had need to be solicited and tickled, by some biting agitation, as this is. See but what
youth, vigor and jollity it restored unto wise Anacreon. And Socrates, when he was
elder then I am, speaking of an amourous object: leaning (saies he) shoulder to shoulder,
and approaching my head unto his, as [we] were both together looking upon a book, I
felt, in truth, a sudden tingling or prickling in my shoulder, like the biting of some beast,
which more then five days after tickled me, whereby a continuall itching glided into my
heart. But a casual touch, and that but in a shoulder, to enflame, to distemper and to
distract a mind, enfeebled, tamed and cooled through age; and of all humane mindes the
most reformed. And why not I pray you? Socrates was but a man, and would neither be
nor seem to be other. Philosophie contends not against natural delights, so that due
measure be joined therewith; and alloweth the moderation, not the shunning of them.
The efforts of her resistance are employed against strange and bastard or lawlesse ones.
She says that the bodies appetites ought not to be encreased by the mind; and wittily
adviseth us, that we should not excite our hunger by saciety; not to stuffe, insteed of
filling our bellies: to avoide all jovissance that may bring us to want: and shunne the meat
and drink which may make us hungry or thirstie. As in the service of love, she appoints
us to take an object that only may satisfie the bodies neede without once moving the
mind, which is not there to have any doing, but only to follow and simply to assist the
body. But have I not reason to think that theseprecepts, which (in mine opinion are
elsewhere somewhat rigorous) have reference unto a body which does his office; and that
a dejected one, as a weakned stomack, may be excused if he cherish and sustain the same
by arte, and by the entercouse of fantazie, to restore it the desires, the delights and
blithnesse, which of itself it has lost. May we not say that there is nothing in us, during
this earthly prison, simply corporall, or purely spirituall? and that injuriously we
dismember a living man? thatthere is reason we should carrie ourselves in the use of
pleasure, at least as favourably as we do in the pangs of grief? For example, it was
vehement, even unto perfection, in the soules of Saints, by repentance. The body had
naturally a part therein, by the right of their combination, and yet might have but little
share in the cause: and were not contented that it should simply follow and assist the
afflicted soul: they have tormented the body itself with convenient and sharpe
punishments; to the end that one with the other, the body and the soul might a vie plunge
man into sorrow so much the more saving, by how much the more smarting. In like case,
in corporal pleasures, is it not injustice to quaile and coole the mind, and say, it must
thereunto be entrained, as unto a forced bond or servile necessity? She should rather hatch
and cherish them, and offer and invite itself unto them; the charge of swaying rightly

belonging to her. Even as in my conceit, it is her part, in her proper delights, to inspire and
infuse into the body all sense or feeling which his condition may bear, and indevour that
they may be both sweet and healthy for him. For, as they say, ’tis good reason, that the
body follow not his appetites to the mindes prejudice or dammage. But why is it not
likewise reason that the mind should not follow hers to the bodies danger and hurt? I
have no other passion that keeps me in breath. What avarice, ambition, quarels, sutes in
law, or other contentions work and effect in others who as my self have no assigned
vacation or certain leisure, love would performe more commodiously: it would restore
me the vigilancy, sobriety, grace and care of my person; and assure my countenance
against the wrinckled frowns of age (those deformed and wretched frownes) which else
would blemish and deface the same; it would reduce me to serious, to sound and wise
studies, whereby I might procure more love, and purchase more estimation: it would purge
my mind from despaire of itself, and of its use, acquainting the same again with it
self: It would divert me from thousands of irksome tedious thoughts, and melancholy
carking cares, wherewith the doting idlenesse and crazed condition of our age does charge
and comber us: It would restore and heat, though but in a dreame, the blood which nature
forsaketh: It would uphold the drooping chinne, and somewhat strengthen or lengthen the
shrunken sinews, decaied vigor, and dulled lives-blithenesse of silly wretched man, who
gallops apace to his ruine. But I am not ignorant how hard a matter it is to attaine to such a
commodity: through weakenesse and long experience, our taste is grown more tender,
more choise, and more exquisite. We challenge most when we bring least; we are most
desirous to choose when we least deserve to be accepted: And knowing ourselves to be
such, we are less hardy and more distrustfull: Nothing can assure us to be beloved, seeing
our condition and their quality. I am ashamed to be in the companie of this greene,
blooming and boyling youth;
Cujus in indomito constantior inguine nervus,
Quam nova collibus arbor inhæret: -- Hor. Epod. xii. 19.
Why should we present our wretchednesse amid this their jollity?
Possint ut juvenes visere fervidi
Multo non sine risu,
Dilapsam in cineres facem, -- Hor. Car. iv. Od. xiii. 26.
That hot young men may go and see,
Not without sport and mery glee,
Their firebrands turn’d to ashes be.
They have both strength and reason on their side; let us give them place: we have no
longer holde fast. This bloome of budding beauty loves not to be handled by such
nummed and so clomsie bands, nor would it be dealt-with by means purely materiall or

ordinary stuffe. For, as that ancient Philosopher answered one that mocked him because
he could not obtaine the favor of a yongling, whom he suingly pursued: ’My friend,’
quoth he, ’the hooke bites not at such fresh cheese.’ It is a commerce needing relation and
mutual correspondency: other pleasures that we receive may be requitted by recompences
of different nature; but this cannot be repaid but with the very same kind of coyne.
Verily, the pleasure I do others in this sport does more sweetly tickle my imagination then
that is done unto me. Now if no generous mind can receive pleasure where he returneth
none, it is a base mind that would have all duty and delights to feed with conference
those under whose charge he remaineth. There is no beauty, nor favor, nor familiarity so
exquisite, which a gallant mind should desire at this rate. Now, if women can do us no
good but in pittie, I had much rather not to live at all then to live by almes. I would I had
the priviledge to demande of them, in the same stile I have heard some beg in Italy: Fate
beno per voi. ’Do some good for your self’; or after the manner that Cyrus exhorted his
soldiers: ’Whosoever loves me, let him follow me.’ Consort your self, will some say
to me, with those of your own condition, whom the company of like fortune will yield of
more easy accesse. Oh sottish and wallowish composition!
-----nolo
Barbam vellere mortito leoni. -- Mar. x. Epig. xc. 9.
I will not pull (though not a fearde),
When he is dead, a Lion’s beard.
Xenophon useth for an objection and accusation against Menon, that in his love he dealt
with fading objects. I take more sensuall pleasure by only viewing the mutual, even-
proporcioned and delicate commixture of two yong beauties; or only to consider the
same in mine imagination, then if my self should be second in a lumpish, sad and
disproporcioned conjunction. I resigne such distasted and fantastic appetites unto the
Emperor Galba, who medled with none but cast, worne, hard-old flesh; And to that
poore slave,
O ego dii faciant talem te cernere possim,
Charaque mutatis oscula ferre comis,
Amplectique meis corpus non pingue lacertis. -- Ovid. Pont. i. El. v. 49.
Gods graunt I may beholde you in such case,
And kisse your chang’d locks with my dearest grace,
And with mine arms your limbs not fat embrace.
And amongst blemishing-deformities, I deem artificiall and forced beautie to be of the
chiefest. Emanez, a young lad of Chios, supposing by gorgeous attires to purchase the
beauty which nature denied him, came to the philosopher Arcesilaus, and asked of him

whether a wise man could be in love or no. ’Yes, marrie,’ quoth he, ’so it were not with a
painted and sophisticate beauty, as thine is.’ The fowlenesse of an old known woman is,
in my seeming not so aged or so ill-favoured as one that’s painted and sleeked. Shall I
bouldly speak it, and not have my throate cut for my labor? Love is not properly nor
naturally in season but in the age next unto infancy.
Quam si puellarum insereres choro,
Mire sagaces falleret hospites.
Discrimen obscurum solutis
Crinibus, ambiguoque vultu. -- Hor. Car. ii. Od. v. 12.
Whom if you should in crue of wenches place,
With hair loose-hanging, and ambiguous face,
Strangely the undiscern’d distinction might
Deceive a thousand strangers of sharpe sight.
No more is perfect beauty. For, whereas Homer extends it until such time as the chinne
begins to bud, Plato himself has noted the same for very rare, and the cause for which
the Sophister Dion termed youthes budding hayres, Aristogitons and Harmodii is
notoriously known. In man-hoode I find it already to be somewhat out of date, much
more in old age.
Importunus enim transuolat aridas
Qærcus. -- Ibid. iv. Od. xiii. 9.
Importune love does ever flie
The Okes with withered old-age drie.
And Margaret, Queen of Navarre, lengthens much (like a woman) the priviledge of
women; Ordaining thirty years to be the season for them to change the title of fair into
good.The shorter possession we allow it over our lives the better for us. Behold its
behaviour. It is a prin-cock boy, who, in his schoole, knows not how far one proceeds
against all order: study, exercise, custom and practise, are paths to insufficiency: the
novices bear all the sway. Amor ordinem nescit: ’Love knowes or keeps no order.’ Surely
its course has more garbe when it is commixt with unadvisednes and trouble: faults and
contrary successes give it edge and grace: so it be eager and hungry, it little importeth
whether it be prudent. Observe but how he staggers, stumbleth and fooleth; you fetter
and shackle him when you guide him by arte and discretion, and you force his sacred
liberty when you submit him to those bearded, grim, and tough-hard hands. Moreover, I
often hear them display this intelligence as absolutely spiritual, disdaining to draw into
consideration the interest which all the sences have in the same. All serveth to the
purpose. But I may say that I have often seen some of us excuse the weaknesse of their

minds in favor of their corporall beauties; but I never saw them yet, that in behalfe of the
mindes-beauties, how sound and ripe soever they were, would afford an helping hand unto
a body that never so little falleth into declination. Why does not some one of them long to
produce that noble Socraticall brood; or breed that precious gem between the body and the
mind, purchasing with the price of her thighes a Philosophicall and spirituall breed and
intelligence, which is the highest rate she can possibly value them at? Plato appointeth in
his laws that he who performeth a notable and worthy exploite in war, during the time of
that expedition, should not be denied a kisse or refused any other amorous favor of
whomsoever he shall please to desire it, without respect either of his ill-favourdnes,
deformity, or age. What he deemeth so just and allowable in commendation of Military
valor, may not the same be thought as lawfull in commendation or some other worth?
and why is not some one of them possessed with the humor to preoccupate on her
companions the glory of this chaste love? chaste I may well say:
-----nam si quando ad prælia ventum est,
Ut quondam stipulis magnus sine viribus ignis
In cassum furit. -- Virg. Georg. iii. 98.
If once it come to handy-gripes; as great,
But forcelesse fire in stubble; so his heate
Rageth amaine, but all in vain.
Vices smothered in ones thought are not the woorst. To conclude this notable
commentarie, escaped from me by a flux of babling, a flux sometimes as violent as
hurtful,
Ut missum sponsi furtivo munere malum,
Procurrit casto virginis e gremio:
Quod miseræ oblitæ molli sub veste locatum,
Dum adventu matris prosilit, excutitur,
Atque illud prono præceps agitur decursu,
Huic manat tristi conscius ore rubor. -- Catul. El. i. 19.
As when some fruit by stealth sent from her friend,
From chaste lap of a virgin does descend,
Which by her, under her soft aprone plast,
Starting at mothers coming thence is cast:
And trilling down in haste does head-long go,
A guilty blush in her sad face does flo.
I say that both male and female are cast in one same moulde; instruction and custom
excepted, there is no great difference betweene them. Plato calleth them both indifferently

to the society of all studies, exercises, charges and functions of war and peace in his
Commonwealth. And the Philosopher Antisthenes took away al distinction betweene their
virtue and ours. It is much more easy to accuse the one sexe then to excuse the other. It is
that which some say proverbially: Ill may the Kill call the Oven burnt tail.



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER VI: OF COACHES






CHAPTER VI: OF COACHES
T IS easy to verifie, that excellent authors’ writing of causes, do not
only make use of those which they imagine true, but eftsoones of such
as themselves believe not: always provided they have some invention
and beautie. They speak sufficiently, truly and profitably, if they
speak ingeniously. We cannot assure ourselves of the chief cause:
we hudle up a many together, to see whether by chance it shall be
found in that number:
Namque unam dicere causam,
Non satis est, verum plures, unde una tamen sit. -- LUCR 1. vi. 700.
Enough it is not one cause to devise,
But more, whereof that one may yet arise. Will you demand of me whence
this custom arises, to blesse and say God helpe to those that sneese? We
produce three sortes of winde: that issuing from belowe is too undecent; that
from the mouth implieth some reproach of gourmandise; the third is

sneesing: and because it commeth from the head, and is without imputation,
we thus kindly entertaine it: smile not at this subtilty, it is (as some say)
Aristotles. Me seems to have read in Plutarch (who of all the authors I
know, has best commixt arte with nature, and coupled judgement with
learning), where he yieldeth a reason why those which travell by sea do
sometimes feel such qualmes and risings of the stomack, saying, that it
proccedeth of a kind of fear: having found-out some reason by which he
prooveth that fear may cause such an effect. My self, who am much
subject unto it, know well that this cause does nothing concerne me. And I
know it, not by argument, but by necessary experience without alleging
what some have tolde me, that the like does often happen unto beasts,
namely, unto swine, when they are farthest from apprehending any danger:
and what an acquaintance of mine has assured me of himself, and who is
greatly subject unto it, that twice or thrice in a tempestous storme, being
surprised with exceeding fear, all manner of desire or inclination to vomit
had left him. As to that ancient good fellow; Peius vexabat quam ut
periculum mihi succurreret: ’I was worse vexed then that danger could
helpe me.’ I never apprehended fear upon the water, nor any where else
(yet have I often had just cause offred me, if death itself may give it)
which either might trouble or astony me. It proceedeth sometimes as well
from want of judgement as from lacke of courage. All the dangers I have
had have been when mine eyes were wide-open, and my sight clear,
sound and perfect. For even to fear, courage is required. It has sometimes
steaded me, in respect of others, to direct and keep my flight in order, that
so it might be, if not without fear, at least without dismay and
astonishment. Indeed, it was moved, but not amazed nor distracted.
Undanted mindes march further, and represent flight, not only temperate,
setled and sound, but also fierce and bold. Report we that which Alcibiades
relateth of Socrates his companion in arms. I found (says he) after the rout
and discomfiture of our army, both him and Lachez in the last rank of
those that ranne away, and with all safety and leisure considered him, for I
was mounted upon an excellent good horse, and he on foote, and so had we
combated all day. I noted first, how in respect of Lachez, he showed both
discreet judgement and undanted resolution: then I observed the undismaide
bravery of his march, nothing different from his ordinary pace: his looke
orderly and constant, duly observing and heedily judging what ever passed
round about him: sometimes viewing the one, and sometimes looking on the
other both friends and enemies, with so composed a manner, that he seemed
to encourage the one and menace the other, signifying, that whosoever
should attempt his life must purchase the same or his blood at a high-valued
rate; and thus they both saved themselves, for men do not willingly graple
with these, but follow such as show or fear or dismay. See here the
testimony of that renowned Captain, who teacheth us what we daily find

by experience, that there is nothing does sooner cast us into dangers then an
inconsiderate greedinesse to avoide them. Quo timoris minus est, eo minus
ferme periculi est: ’The less fear there is, most commonly the less danger
there is.’ Our people is to blame to say such a one feareth death, when it
would signifie that he thinkes on it and does foresee the same. Foresight
does equally belong as well to that which concerneth us in good as touch us
in evil. To consider and judge danger is in some sort not to be danted at it. I
do not find my self sufficiently strong to withstand the blow and violence
of this passion of fear, or of any other impetuosity; where I once therewith
vanquished and deterred, I could never safely recover my self. He that
should make my mind forgoe her footing could never bring her unto her
place again. She does over lively sound and over deepely search into her
self, and therefore never suffers the wound which pierced the same to be
throughly cured and consolidated. It has been happy for me that no
infirmity could ever yet displace her. I oppose and present myself in the
best ward I have against all charges and assaults that beset me. Thus the
first that should bear me away would make me unrecoverable. I encounter
not two which way soever spoile should enter my hold, there am I open and
remedilesly drowned. Epicurus says that a wise man can never pass from
one state to its contrary. I have some opinion answering his sentence, that
he who has once been a very foole shall at no time proove very wise. God
sends my cold answerable to my cloths, and passions answering the means
I have to endure them. Nature having discovered me on one side, has
covered me on the other. Having disarmed me of strength, she has armed
me with insensibility, and a regular or soft apprehension. I cannot long
endure (and less could in my youth) to ride either in coach or litter, or to
go in a boat; and both in the citty and country I hate all manner of riding but
a horse-back; And can less endure a litter then a coach, and by the same
reason more easily a rough agitation upon the water, whence commonly
proceedeth fear, then the soft stirring a man shall feel in calme weather.
By the same easy gentle motion which the oares give, convaying the boat
under us, I wot not how I feel both my head intoxicated and my stomacke
distempered, as I cannot likewise abide a shaking stoole under me. Whenas
either the saile, or the gliding course of the water does equaly carry us away,
or that we are but towed, that gently gliding and even agitation does no whit
distemper or hurt me. It is an interrupted and broken motion that offends
me, and more when it is languishing. I am not able to display its form.
Phisitions have taught me to bind and gird my self with a napkin or swath
round about the lower part of my belly as a remedy for this accident, which
as yet I have not tride, beeing accustomed to wrestle and withstand such
defects as are in me, and tame them by my self. Were my memory
sufficiently informed of them, I would not think my time lost here to set
down the infinite variety which histories present unto us of the use of

coaches in the service of war; diverse according to the nations, and
different according to the ages, to my seeming of great effect and necessity.
So that it is wondrously strange how we have lost all true knowledge of
them; I will only aleadge this, that even lately in our fathers time, the
Hungarians did very availefully bring them into fashion, and profitably set
them a work against the Turks; every one of them containing a Targattier
and a Muskettier, with a certain number of harquebuses or calivers, ready
charged, and so ranged that they might make good use of them, and all over
covered with a pavesado after the manner of a Galliotte. They made the
front of their battaile with three thousand such coaches, and after the
Cannon had playd, caused them to discharge and shoote off a volie of small
shott upon their enemies before they should know or feel what the rest of
the forces could do, which was no small advancement; or if not this, they
mainely drove those coaches amidde the thickest of their enemies
squadrons, with purpose to breake, disroute, and make waie through them.
Besides the benefit and helpe they might make of them in any suspicious or
dangerous place, to flanke their troupes marching from place to place; or in
hast to encompasse, to embarricado , to cover or fortifie any lodgement or
quarter. In my time, a gentleman of quality in one of our frontiers,
unwealdie and so burly of body that he could find no horse able to bear
his waight, and having a quarrell or deadly fude in hand, was wont to
travaile up and down in a coach made after this fashion, and found much
ease and good in it. But leave we these warlike coaches, as if their nullity
were not sufficiently known by better tokens; The last Kings of our first
race were wont to travell in chariots drawne by foure oxen. Mark Antoni
was the first that caused himself, accompanied with a minsterell harlot, to
be drawne by Lyons fitted to a coach. So did Heliogabalus after him,
naming himself Cibele, the mother of the Gods; and also by Tigers,
counterfeiting God Bacchus; who sometimes would also be drawne in a
coach by two Stagges, and another time by foure mastive dogs; and by foure
naked wenches, causing himself to be drawne by them in pompe and
state, he being all naked. The emperour Firmus made his coach to be
drawne by Estriges of exceeding greatness, so that he rather seemed to
flye then to roule on wheeles. The strangenesse of these inventions does
bring this other thing unto my fantasie, That it is a kind of pusilanimity in
Monarkes, and a testimony that they do not sufficiently know what they
are when they labor to show their worth, and endeavour to appeare unto
the world by excessive and intolerable expences. A thing which in a strange
country might somewhat be excused, but among his native subjects where
he swayeth all in all, he draweth from his dignity the extreamest degree of
honor that he may possibly attaine unto. As for a gentleman in his own
private house to apparrel himself richly and curiously, I deem it a matter
vain and superfluous; his house, his houshold, his traine and his kitchin

do sufficiently answere for him. The counsell which Isocrates gives to his
King (in my conceite) seems to carry some reason, when he wills him
to be richly-stored and stately adorned with mooveables and household-
stuffe, forasmuch as it is an expence of continuance, and which descendeth
even to his posterity or heirs; And to avoyde all magnificences which
presently vanish both from custom and memory. I loved when I was a
yonger brother to set my self foorth and be gaye in cloathes, though I
wanted other necessaries, and it became me well: There are some on
whose backes their rich Robes weepe, or as we say their rich cloathes are
lyned with heavy debts. We have diverse strange tales of our auncient Kings
frugality about their own persons, and in their gifts: great and far
renouned Kings both in credit, in valor, and in fortune. Demosthenes
mainely combates the law of his City, who assigned their public money
to be employed about the stately setting forth of their playes and feasts. He
wills that their magnificence should be seen in the quantity of tall ships
well manned and appointed, and armies well furnished. And they have
reason to accuse Theophrastus, who in his book of riches established a
contrary opinion, and upholdeth such a quality of expences to be the true
fruit of wealth and plenty. They are pleasures (says Aristotle) that only
touch the vulgar and basest communalty, which as soone as a man is
satisfied with them, vanish out of mind; and whereof no man of sound
judgement or gravity can make any esteeme. The employment of it, as more
profitable, just and durable, would seem more royall, worthy and
commendable, about ports, havens, fortifications and walles; in sumptuous
buildings, in churches, hospitals, colledges, mending of heighwayes and
streetes, and such like monuments; in which things Pope Gregory the
thirteenth shall leave aye-lasting and commendable memory unto his name;
and wherein our Queene Catherine should witnes unto succeeding ages her
natural liberality and exceeding bounty, if her means were answerable to
her affection. Fortune has much spighted me to hinder the structure and
breake-off the finishing of our new bridge in our great City, and before my
death to deprive me of all hope to see the great necessity of it set forward
again. Moreover, it appeareth unto subjects, spectators of these triumphs,
that they have a show made them of their own riches, and that they are
feasted at their proper charges; For the people do easily presume of their
kings as we do of our servants that they should take care plenteously to
provide us of whatsoever we stand in neede of, but that on their behalfe
they should no way lay hands on it. And therefore the Emperor Galba
sitting at supper, having taken pleasure to hear a musitian play and sing
before him, sent for his casket, out of which be took a handful of Crowns
and put them into his hand, with these wordes: ’Take this, not as a gift of the
public money but of my own private store.’ So is it, that it often
commeth to pass, that the common people have reason to grudge, and that

their eyes are fedde with that which should feede their belly. Liberality it
self, in a sovereign hand, is not in her own luster: private men have more
right, and may challenge more interest in her. For, taking the matter exactly
as it is, a King has nothing that is properly his own; he oweth even
himself to others. Authority is not given in favor of the authorising, but
rather in favor of the authorised. A superiour is never created for his own
profit, but rather for the benefit of the inferiour; and a Physition is
instituted for the sicke, not for himself. All Magistracie, even as each arte,
rejects her end out of herself. Nulla ars in se versatur: ’No arte is all in
itself.’ Wherefore the governours and overseers of Princes’ childhood or
minority, who so earnestly endeavor to imprint this virtue of bounty and
liberality in them, and teach them not to refuse any thing, and esteeme
nothing so well employed as what they shall give (an instruction which in
my dayes I have seen in great credit) either they prefer and respect more
their own profit than their masters, or they understand not aright to whom
they speak. It is too easy a matter to imprint liberality in him that has
wherewith plenteously to satisfie what be desires at other men’s charges.
And his estimation being directed not according to the measure of the
present, but according to the quality of his means that exerciseth the same,
it commeth to prove vain in so puissant hands. They are found to be
prodigall before they be liberall. Therefore it is but of small commendation,
in respect of other royall vertues; and the only (as said the tyrant
Dionysius) that agreed and squared well with tyrannie itself. I would
rather teach him the verse of the ancient labourer,
τη χειρι δει σπειρειν αλλα η ολω τω θυλακω.
-- PLUT. de Athen. ERAS. Chil. iii. cent. i. ad. 32.
Not whole sackes, but by the hand
A man should sow his seed i’ the land.
That whosoever will reape any commodity by it must sow with his hand,
and not powre out of a sacke; that corne must be discreetly scattered, and
not lavishly dispersed; and that being to give, or, to say better, to pay and
restore to such a multitude of People, according as they have deserved, he
ought to be a loyall, faithfull, and advised distributer thereof. If the
liberality of a Prince be without heedy discretion and measure, I would
rather have him covetous and sparing. Princely virtue seems to consist
most in justice; and of all parts of justice that does best and most belong to
Kings which accompanieth liberality; for they have it particularly reserved
to their charge; whereas all other justice they happily exercise the same by
the intermission of others. Immoderate bounty is a weake meane to acquire
them good will: for it rejects more people than it obtaineth: Quo in plures

usus sis, minus in multos uti possis. Quid autem est stultius, quam, quod
libenter facias, curare ut id diutius facere non possis? (Cic. Off. 1.) ’The
more you have used it to many, the less may you use it to many more; and
what is more foolish than what you willingly would do, to provide you can no
longer do it?’ And if it be emploied without respect of merit, it shameth
him that receiveth the same, and is received without grace. Some Tyrants
have been sacrificed to the peoples hatred by the very hands of those whom
they had rashly preferred and wrongfully advanced: such kind of men,
meaning to assure the possession of goods unlawfully and indirectly gotten,
if they show to hold in contempt and hatred him from whom they held them,
and in that combine themselves unto the vulgar judgement and common
opinion. The subjects of a Prince rashly excessive in his gifts become
impudently excessive in begging: they adhere, not unto reason, but unto
example. Verily we have often, just cause to blush for our impudency. We
are overpaid according to justice, when the recompence equaleth our
service; for do we not owe a kind of natural duty to our Princes? If he
bear our charge, he does overmuch; it sufficeth if he assist it: the over-
plus is called a benefit which cannot be exacted; for the very name of
liberality implyeth liberty. After our fashion we have never done; what is
received is no more reckoned of: only future liberality is loved: Wherefore
the more a Prince does exhaust himself in giving, the more friends he
impoverisheth. How should he satisfie intemperate desires which increase
according as they are replenished? Whoso has his mind on taking, has it
no more on what he has taken. Covetousnesse has nothing so proper as to
be ungrateful. The example of Cyrus shal not ill fit this place, for the
behoofe of our kings of these days, as a touch-stone, to know whether their
gifts be well or ill employed: and make them perceive how much more
happily that Emperor did wound and oppresse them than they do.
Whereby they are afterward forced to exact and borrow of their unknown
subjects, and rather of such as they have wronged and aggrieved than of
those they have enriched and done good unto; and receive no aids, where
any thing is gratitude, except the name. Croesus upbraided him with his
lavish bounty, and calculated what his treasure would amount unto if he
were more sparing and close-handed. A desire surprised him to justify his
liberality, and dispatching letters over all parts of his dominions to such
great men of his estate whom he had particularly advanced, entreated every
one to assist him with as much money as they could for an urgent necessitie
of his, and presently to send it him by declaration; when all these count-
bookes or notes were brought him, each of his friends supposing that it
sufficed not to offer him no more than they had received of his bounteous
liberality, but adding much of their own unto it, it was found that the said
summe amounted unto much more than the niggardly sparing of Croesus.
Whereupon Cyrus said: ’I am no less greedy of riches than other Princes,

but I am rather a better husband of them. You see with what small venture I
have purchased the unvaluable treasure of so many friends, and how much
more faithfull treasurers they are to me than mercenary men would be,
without obligation and without affection; and my exchequer or treasury
better placed than in paltery coafers; by which I draw upon me the hate, the
envy and the contempt of other Princes.’ The ancient Emperours were wont
to draw som excuse, for the superfluity of their sports and public shewes,
for so much as their authority did in some sort depend (at least in
apparance) from the will of the Roman people; which from all ages are
accustomed to be flattered by such kind of spectacles and excesses. But
they were particular ones who had bred this custom to gratifie their con-
citizens and fellowes; especially by their purse, by such profusion and
magnificence. It was cleane altered when the masters and chief rulers came
once to imitate the same. Pecuniarum translatio a justis dominis ad alienos
non debet liberalis videri: (Cic. Off. 1.) ’The passing of money from right
owners to strangers should not seem liberality.’ Philip, because his son
indeavoured by gifts to purchase the good will of the Macedonians, by a
letter seemed to be displeased, and chid him in this manner: ’What, would
you have your subjects to account you for their purse-bearer, and not repute
you for their King? Wilt you frequent and practise them? Then do it with
the benefits of your virtue, not with those of your cofers.’ Yet was it a goodly
thing to cause a great quantity of great trees, all branchie and greene, to be
far brought and planted in plots yielding nothing but dry gravell,
representing a wild shady forrest, divided in due seemely proportion; And
the first day to put into the same a thousand Estriges, a thousand Stagges, a
thousand wild Boares, and a thousand Buckes, yielding them over to be
hunted and killed by the common people: the next morrow in the presence
of all the assembly to cause a hundred great Lions, a hundred Leopards, and
three hundred huge Beares to be baited and tugged in pieces: and for the
third day, in bloody manner and good earnest, to make three hundred couple
or Gladiators or Fencers to combate and murder one another, as did the
Emperor Probus. It was also a goodly show to see those huge
Amphitheaters all enchased with rich marble, on the outside curiously
wrought with curious statues, and all the inner side glittering with precious
and rare embellishments:
Balteus en gemmis, en illita porticus auro.
A belt beset with gemmes behold,
Behold a walke bedawb’d with gold.
All the sides round about that great void, replenished and invironed from
the ground unto the very top with three or foure score rankes of steps and

seates, likewise all of marble covered with fair cushions
----- exeat, inquit,
Si pudor est, et de pulvino surgat equestri,
Cujus res legi non sufficit. -- Juven. Sat. iii. 153.
If shame there be, let him be gone, he cries,
And from his knightly cushion let him rise,
Whose substance to the law does not suffice.
Where might conveniently be placed an hundred thousand men, and all sit
at ease. And the plaine-ground-work of it, where sports were to be acted,
first by Art to cause the same to open and chap in sunder with gaps and
cranishes representing hollow cavernes, which vomited out the beasts
appointed for the spectacle; that ended, immediately to overflow it all with a
main deepe sea, fraught with store of sea- monsters and other strange
fishes , all over-laid with goodly tall ships, ready rigd and appointed to
represent a Sea-fight; and thirdly, suddenly to make it smooth and drie
again for the combate of Gladiators; and fourthly, being forthwith
cleansed, to strewe it over with Vermilion and Storax, insteade of graven,
for the erecting of a solemn banket for all that infinite number of people:
the last act of one only day.
----- quoties nos descendentis arenæ
Vidimus in partes, ruptaque voraqine terræ
Emersisse feras, et ijsdem sæpe latebris
Aurea cum croceo creuerunt arbuta libro.
Nec solum nobis silvestria cernere monstra
Contigit equoreos; ego cum certantibus ursis
Spectavi vitulos, et equorum nomine dignum,
Sed deforme pecus.
How oft have we beheld wild beasts appeare
From broken gulfes of earth, upon some parte
Of sande that did not sinke? how often there
And thence did golden boughs ore saf fron’d starte?
Nor only saw we monsters of the wood,
But I have seen Sea-calves whom Beares withstood
And such a kind of beast as might be named
A horse, but in most foul proportion framed.
They have sometimes caused an high steepy mountaine to arise in the

midst of the sayd Amphitheaters, all over-spred with fruitfull and
flourishing trees of all sortes, on the top whereof gushed out streames of
water as from out the source of a purling spring. Other times they have
produced therein a great tall Ship floating up and down, which of itself
opened and split asunder, and after it had disgorged from out its bulke foure
or five hundred wild beasts to be baited, it closed and vanished away of it
self, without any visible helpe. Sometimes from out the bottome of it they
caused streakes and purlings of sweet water to spoute up, bubling to the
highest top of the frame, and gently watring, sprinkling and refreshing that
infinite multitude. To keep and cover themselves from the violence of the
wether, they caused that huge compasse to be all over-spred, sometimes
with purple sailes, all curiously wrought with the needle, sometimes of silke
and of some other colour in the twinkling of an eye, as they pleased they
displaid and spred, or drewe and pulled them in again.
Quamvis non modico caleant spectacula sole
Vela reducuntur cum venit Hermogenes. -- Mart. xii. Epig.
29, 15.
Though fervent Sunne make’t hotte to see a play,
When linnen thieves come, sailes are kept away.
The nets likewise, which they used to put before the people to save them
from harm and violence of the baited beasts, were woven with golde.
----- auro quoque torta refulgent
Retia.
Nets with gold enterlaced,
Their shewes with glittring graced.
If any thing be excusable in such lavish excesses it is where the
invention and strangenesse breedeth admiration, and not the costlie charge.
Even in those vanities, we may plainely perceive how fertile and happy
those former ages were of other manner of wittes then ours are. It happens
of this kind of fertilitie as of all other productions of nature. We may not
say what nature employed then the utmost of her power. We go not, but
rather creepe and stagger here and there: we go our pace. I imagine our
knowledge to be weake in all senses: we neither discerne far- forward,
nor see much backward. It embraceth little and liveth not long: It is short
both in extension of time and in amplenesse of matter or invention.

Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona
Multi, sed omnes illachrymabiles
Urgentur, ignotique longa
Nocte. -- HOR. Car. 1. iv. Od. ix. 25.
Before great Agamemnon and the rest
Many liv’d valiant, yet are all supprest,
Unmoan’d, unknown, in darke oblivious nest.
Et supera bellum Troianum et funera Troiæ,
Multi alias alii quoque res cecinere poetæ. -- LUCR. 1. v.
326.
Beside the Trojan war, Troyes funerall night,
Of other things did other poets write.
And Solons narration concerning what he had learned of the Egyptian
Priests of their states, long-life and manner how to learne and preserve
strange or forraine histories, in mine opinion is not a testimony to be
refused in this consideration. Si interminatant in omnes partes
magnitudinem regionum videremus, et temporum in quam se iniiciens
animus et intendens, ita late longeque peregrinatur, ut nullam oram ultimi
videat in qua possit insistere: In hæc immensitate infinita vis
innumerabilium appareret formarum: (CIC. Nat. Deo. i. ) ’If we behold an
unlimited greatness on all sides both of regions and times, whereupon the
mind casting itself and intentive does travell far and neare, so as it sees
----- 1 2 3 no bounds of what is last, whereon it may insist; in this infinite
immensity there would appeare a multitude of innumerable formes.’ If
whatsoever has come unto us by report of what is past where true and
known of any body, it would be less then nothing, in respect of that which
is unknown. And even of this image of the world, which while we live
therein, glideth and passeth away, how wretched, weake and how short is
the knowledge of the most curious? Not only of the particular events which
fortune often maketh exemplar and of consequence; but of the state of
mighty commonwealths, large Monarkies and renowned nations, there
escapeth our knowledge a hundred times more then commeth unto our
notice. We keep a coile and wonder at the miraculous invention of our
artilerie, and amazed at the rare devise of Printing; when as unknown to us,
other men, and an other end of the world named China, knew and had
perfect use of both a thousand years before. If we sawe as much of this
vaste world as we see but a least part of it, it is very likely we should
perceive a perpetuall multiplicity and over-rouling vicissitude of formes.
Therein is nothing singular and nothing rare, if regard be had unto nature,

or to say better, if relation be had unto our knowledge; which is a weake
foundation of our rules, and which does commonly present us a right-false
Image of things. How vainely do we now-adayes conclude the declination
and decrepitude of the world, by the foolish arguments we drawe from our
own weaknesse, drooping and declination:
Jamque adeo afecta est ætas, affetaque tellus: -- LUCR. ii.
1159.
And now both age and land
So sicke affected stand.
And as vainly did another conclude its birth and youth by the vigor he
perceiveth in the wits of his time, abounding in novelties and invention of
diverse Arts:
Verum ut opinor, habet novitatem summa, recensque
Natura est mundi, neque pridem exordia cepit;
Quare etiant quædam nunc artes expoliuntur,
Nunc etiam augescunt, nunc addita navigiis sunt
Multa. -- Ibid. v. 330.
But all this world is new, as I suppose,
Worlds nature fresh, nor lately it arose
Whereby some arts refined are in fashion,
And many things now to our navigation
Are added, daily grown to augmentation.
Our world has of late discovered another (and who can warrant us whether
it be the last of his brethren, since both the Damons, the Sibylles, and all we
have hitherto been ignorant of this? no less- large, fully-peopled, all-things-
yielding, and mighty in strength than ours; nevertheless so new and
infantine, that he is yet to learne his A. B. C. It is not yet full fifty yeeres
that he knew neither letters, nor waight, nor measures, nor apparell, nor
corne, nor vines; But was all naked, simply-pure, in Natures lappe, and
lived but with such means and food as his mother-nurce affoorded him. If
we conclude aright of our end, and the foresaid Poet of the infancie of his
age, this late-world shall but come to light when ours shall fall into
darknesse. The whole Universe shall fall into a palsey or convulsion of
sinnowes: one member shall be maimed or shrunken, another nimble and in
good plight. I fear that by our contagion we shall directly have furthered
his declination and hastened his ruine and that we shall too dearely have

sold him our opinions, our new-fangles and our Arts. It was an unpolluted,
harmelesse, infant world; yet have we not whipped and submitted the same
unto our discipline, or schooled him by the advantage of our valor or
natural forces; nor have we instructed him by our justice and integrity, nor
subdued by our magnanimity. Most of their answers, and a number of the
negotiations we have had with them, witness that they were nothing short
of us, not beholding to us for any excellency of natural wit or perspicuitie
concerning pertinency. The wonderful, or as I may call it, amazement-
breeding magnificence of the never-like seen cities of Cusco and Mexico,
and amongst infinite such like things, the admirable Garden of that King,
where all the Trees, the fruits, the Hearbes and Plants, according to the
order and greatness they have in a Garden, were most artificially framed in
gold; as also in his Cabinet; all the living creatures that his Countrey or his
Seas produced, were cast in gold; and the exquisite beauty of their workes,
in precious Stones, in Feathers, in Cotton and in Painting, show that they
yielded as little unto us in cunning and industrie. But concerning unfained
devotion, awefull observance of laws, unspotted integrity, bounteous
liberality, due loyalty and free liberty, it has greatly availed us that we had
not so much as they: By which advantage they have lost, castaway, sold,
undone and betraied themselves.
Touching hardinesse and undaunted courage, and as for matchlesse
constancy, unmooved assurednesse, and undismaied resolution against
pain, smarting, famine and death itself, I will not fear to oppose the
examples which I may easily find amongst them, to the most famous
ancient examples we may with all our industrie discover in all the Annales
and memories of our knowen old World. For as for those which have
subdued them, let them lay aside the wiles, the policies and stratagems
which they have emploied to cozen, to cunny-catch, and to circumvent
them; and the just astonisbment which those nations might justly conceive,
by seeing so unexpected an arrivall of bearded men, diverse in language, in
habite, in religion, in behaviour, in form, in countenance, and from a part
of the world so distant, and where they never heard any habitation was:
mounted upon great and unknowen monsters, against those who had had
never so much as seen any horse, and less any beast whatsoever apt to
bear, or taught to carry either man or burden; covered with a shining and
harde skinne, and armed with slicing-keene weapons and glittering armour:
against them, who for the wonder of the glistring of a looking-glasse or of a
plaine knife would have changed or given inestimable riches in Gold,
Precious Stones and Pearles; and who had neither the skill nor the matter
wherewith at any leisure they could have pierced our steele: to which you
may adde the flashing-fire and thundring roare of shotte and Harguebuses;
able to quell and daunt even Cæsar himself, had he been so sodainely
surprised and as little experienced as they were; and thus to come unto and

assault silly-naked people, saving where the invention of weaving of Cotton
cloath was known and used; for the most altogether unarmed, except some
bowes, stones, staves and woodden bucklers; unsuspecting poore people,
surprised under colour of amity and well-meaning faith overtaken by the
curiosity to see strange and unknown things: I say, take this disparity from
the conquerors, and you deprive them of all the occasions and cause of so
many unexpected victories. When I consider that stern-untamed obstinacy
and undanted vehemence wherewith so many thousands of men, of women
and children, do so infinite times present themselves unto inevitable
dangers, for the defense of their Gods and liberty: This generous obstinacy
to endure all extremities, all difficulties and death, more easily and
willingly, then basely to yielde unto their domination, of whom they have
so abhominably been abused: some of them choosing rather to starve with
hunger and fasting, being taken, then to accept food at their enemies handes,
so basely victorious: I perceive, that whoseever had undertaken them man to
man, without ods of arms, of experience or of number, should have had as
dangerous a war, or perhaps more, as any we see amongst us.
Why did not so glorious a conquest happen under Alexander, or during
the time of the ancient Greekes and Romanes? or why befell not so great a
change and alteration of Empires and people under such hands as would
gently have polished, reformed and incivilized what in them they deemed to
be barbarous and rude: or would have nourished and fostered those good
seedes which nature had there brought foorth: adding not only to the
manuring of their grounds and ornaments of their cities such artes as we
had, and that no further then had been necessary for them, but there-withall
joyning unto the originall vertues of the country those of the ancient
Greeks and Romanes? What reputation and what reformation would all
that far spredding world have found, if the examples, demeanors and
pollicies wherewith we first presented them had called and allured those
uncorrupted nations to the admiration and imitation of virtue, and had
established betweene them and us a brotherly society and mutual
correspondency? How easy a matter had it been profitably to reforme and
christianly to instruct minds yet so pure and new, so willing to be taught,
being for the most part endowed with so docile, so apt and so yielding
natural beginnings? Whereas, contrarywise, we have made use of their
ignorance and inexperience, to drawe them more easily unto treason, fraude,
luxurie, avarice and all manner of inhumanity and cruelty, by the example
of our life and patterne of our customs. Who ever raised the service of
marchandize and benefit of traffick to so high a rate? So many goodly
citties ransacked and raged; so many nations destroyed and made desolate;
so infinite millions of harmelesse people of all sexes, states and ages,
massacred, ravaged and put to the sword; and the richest, the fairest and the
best part of the world topsiturvied, ruined and defaced for the traffick of

Pearles and Pepper. Oh mechanicall victories, oh base conquest. Never did
greedy revenge, publik wrongs or general enmities, so moodily enrage and
so passionately incense men against men, unto so horrible hostilities,
bloody dissipation, and miserable calamities.
Certain Spaniardes, coasting alongst the Sea in search of mines, fortuned
to land in a very fertile, pleasant and well peopled country, unto the
inhabitants whereof they declared their intent and showed their accustomed
persuasions; saying, That they were quiet and well-meaning men, coming
from far-countries, being sent from the King of Castile, the greatest King
of the habitable earth, unto whom the Pope, representing God on earth, had
given the principality of all the Indies. That if they would become
tributaries to him, they should be most kindly used and courteously
entreated: They required of them victualles for their nourishment, and some
gold for the behoofe of certain Physicall experiments. Moreover, they
declared unto them the beleeving in one only God and the trueth of our
religion, which they persuaded them to embrace, adding thereto some
minatorie threates. Whose answer was this: That happily they might be quiet
and well meaning, but their countenance showed them to be otherwise: As
concerning their King, since he seemed to beg, he showed to be poore and
needy; And for the Pope, who had made that distribution, he expressed
himself a man loving dissention, in going about to give unto a third man a
thing which was not his own, so to make it questionable and litigious
amongst the ancient possessors of it. As for victualles, they should have part
of their store; And for gold, they had but little, and that it was a thing they
made very small accoumpt of, as meerely unprofitable for the service of
their life; whereas all their care was but how to pass it happily and
pleasantly, and therefore, what quantity soever they should find, that only
excepted which was employed about the service of their Gods, they might
bouldly take it. As touching one only God, the discourse of him had very
well pleased them; but they would by no means change their religion
under which they had for so long time lived so happily; and that they were
not accustomed to take any counsell, but of their friends and acquaintance.
As concerning their menaces, it was a signe of want of judgement to
threaten those whose nature, condition, power and means was to them
unknown. And therefore they should with all speed hasten to avoid their
dominions (forasmuch as they were not wont to admit or take in good part
the kindnesses and remonstrances of armed people, namely, of strangers)
otherwise they would deale with them as they had done with such others,
shewing them the heads of certain men sticking upon stakes about their
City, which had lately been executed.
See here an example of the stammering of this infancy. But so it is,
neither in this nor in infinite other places, where the Spaniards found not the
merchandise they sought for, neither made stay or attempted any violence

whatsoever other commodity the place yielded: witness my Canibales. Of
two the most mighty and glorious Monarkes of that world, and perhaps
of all our Westerne parts, Kings over so many Kings, the last they deposed
and overcame; He of Peru, having by them been taken in a battle, and set at
so excessive a ransome that it exceedeth all beliefe, and that truely paide:
and by his conversation having given them apparant signes of a free,
liberall, undanted, and constant courage, and declared to be of a pure, noble,
and well composed understanding; a humor possessed the conquerors,
after they had most insolently exacted from him a Million three hundred
five and twenty thousand, and five hundred waights of golde, besides the
silver and other precious things, which amounted to no less a summe (so
that their horses were all shood of massive gold), to discover (what
disloyalty or treachery soever it might cost them) what the remainder of this
Kings treasure might be, and without controlment enjoy whatever he might
have hidden or concealed from them. Which to compasse, they forged a
false accusation and proofe against him, that he practised to raise his
provinces, and intended to induce his subjects to some insurrection, so to
procure his liberty. Whereupon, by the very judgement of those who had
complotted this forgery and treason against him, he was condemned to be
publikely hanged and strangled; having first made him to redeeme the
torment of being burned alive by the baptisme which at the instant of his
execution in charity they bestowed upon him; a horrible and the like never
heard of accident, which nevertheless he undismaiedly endured with an
unmoved manner and truly-royall gravity, without ever contradicting
himself either in countenance or speech. And then, somewhat to mitigate
and circumvent those silly unsuspecting people, amazed and astonished at
so strange a spectacle, they counterfeited a great mourning and lamentation
for his death, and appointed his funeralls to be solemnely and sumptuously
celebrated.
The other King of Mexico, having a long time manfully defended his
besieged city, and in the tedious siege showed whatever pinching-
sufferance and resolute-perseverance can effect, if ever any courageous
Prince or war-like people showed the same; and his disastrous success
having delivered him alive into his enemies hands, upon conditions to be
used as beseemed a King: who during the time of his imprisonment did
never make the least show of any thing unworthy that glorious title. After
which victory, the Spaniards, not finding that quantitie of gold they had
promised themselves, when they had ransacked and ranged all corners, they
by means of the cruellest tortures and horriblest torments they could
possibly devise, beganne to wrest and draw some more from such prisoners
as they had in keeping. But unable to profit any thing that way, finding
stronger hearts than their torments, they in the end fell to such moody
outrages, that, contrary to all law of nations and against their solemn

vows and promises, they condemned the King himself and one of the
chiefest Princes of his Court, to the Racke, one in presence of another: the
Prince, environed round with hot burning coales, being overcome with the
exceeding torment, at last in most pitious sort turning his dreary eyes
toward his Master, as if he asked mercy of him for that he could endure it
no longer; The king, fixing rigorously and fierce his looks upon him,
seeming to upbraid him with his remisnesse and pusilanimity, with a stern
and setled voice uttered these few words unto him: ’What, supposest then I
am in a cold bath? am I at more ease than you are?’ Whereat the silly
wretch immediately fainted under the torture, and yielded up the ghost. The
king, half rosted, was carried away: Not so much for pity (for what ruth
could ever enter so barbarous mindes, who upon the furnished information
of some odde piece or vessell of golde they intended to get, would broyle a
man before their eyes, and not a man only, but a king, so great in fortune
and so renowned in desert?), but for as much as his unmatched constancy
did more and more make their inhumane cruelty ashamed, they afterwards
hanged him, because he had courageously attempted by arms to deliver
himself out of so long captivity and miserable subjection; where he ended
his wretched life, worthy an high minded and never danted Prince. At
another time, in one same fire, they caused to be burned all alive foure
hundred common men and threescore principal Lords of a Province, whom
by the fortune of war they had taken prisoners. These narrations we have
out of their own bookes, for they do not only avouch, but vauntingly
publish them. May it be they do it for a testimony of their justice or zeale
toward their religion? Verily they are ways over-different and enemies to
so sacred an ende. Had they proposed unto themselves to enlarge and
propagate our religion, they would have considered that it is not amplified
by possession of lands, but of men; and would have been satisfied with
such slaughters as the necessity of war bringeth, without indifferently
adding thereunto so bloody a butchery as upon savage beasts, and so
universall as fire or sword could ever attaine unto having purposely
preserved no more than so many miserable bond- slaves, as they deemed
might suffice for the digging, working and service of their mines: So that
diverse of their chieftains have been executed to death, even in the places
they had conquered, by the appointment of the Kings of Castile, justly
offended at the seld-seen horror of their barbarous demeanours, and well
nigh all disesteemed, contemned and hated. God has meritoriously
permitted that many of their great pillages and ill-gotten goods have either
been swallowed up by the revenging Seas in transporting them, or
consumed by the intestine wars and civill broiles wherewith themselves
have devoured one another; and the greatest part of them have been
overwhelmed and buried in the bowels of the earth, in the very places they
found them, without any fruit of their victory. Touching the objection which

some make, that the receipt, namely in the hands of so thrifty, wary and
wise a Prince, does so little answer the foreconceived hope which was given
unto his predecessors, and the said former aboundance of riches, they met
withall at the first discovery of this new-found world (for although they
bring home great quantity of gold and silver, we perceive the same to be
nothing, in respect of what might be expected thence), it may be answered,
that the use of money was there altogether unknown; and consequently that
all their gold was gathered together, serving to no other purpose than for
show, state and ornament, as a moovable reserved from father to son by
many puissant Kings, who exhausted all their mines to collect so huge a
heape of vessels or statues for the ornament of their Temples, and
embellishing of their Pallaces; whereas all our gold is employed in
commerce and trafficke betweene man and man. We mince and alter it into
a thousand formes; we spend, we scatter and disperse the same to severall
uses. Suppose our King should thus gather and heape up all the gold they
might for many ages hoard up together, and keep it close and untouched.
Those of the kingdome of Mexico were somewhat more encivilized, and
better artists, than other nations of that world. And as we do, so judged
they, that this Universe was neare his end, and took the desolation we
brought amongst them as an infallible signe of it. They beleeved the state of
the world to be divided into five ages, as in the life of five succeeding
Sunnes, whereof foure had already ended their course or time; and the same
which now shined upon them was the fifth and last. The first perished
together with all other creatures, by an universall inundation of waters. The
second by the fall of the heavens upon us, which stifled and overwhelmed
every living thing: in which age they affirme the Giants to have been, and
showed the Spaniards certain bones of them, according to whose
proportion the stature of men came to be, of the height of twenty handfuls.
The third was consumed by a violent fire, which burned and destroyed all.
The fourth by a whirling emotion of the air and winds, which with the
violent fury of itself remooved and overthrew diverse high mountaines:
saying that men dyed not of it, but were transformed into Munkeis. (Oh
what impressions does not the weakenesse of mans beliefe admit?) After the
consummation of this fourth Sunne, the world continued five and twenty
years in perpetuall darkenesse, in the fifteenth of which one man and one
woman were created, who renewed the race of man-kind. Ten years after,
upon a certain day, the Sunne appeared as newly created, from which day
beginneth ever since the calculation of their years. On the third day of
whose creation, died their ancient Gods, their new ones have day by day
been borne since. In what manner this last Sunne shall perish, my aucthor
could not learne of them. But their number of this fourth change does jumpe
and meete with that great conjunction of the Starres which eight hundred
and odde years since, according to the Astrologians supposition, produced

diverse great alterations and strange novelties in the world. Concerning the
proud pompe and glorious magnificence by occasion of which I am fallen
into this discourse, nor Grece, nor Rome, nor Ægipt, can (be it in profit, or
difficultie or nobility) equall or compare sundrie and diverse of their workes.
The cawcy or high-way which is yet to be seen in Peru, erected by the
Kings of that countrie, stretching from the city of Quito unto that of Cusco
(containing three hundred leagues in length), straight, even, and fine, and
twentie paces in breadth curiously paved, raysed on both sides with goodly
high masonrie-walles, all along which, on the inner side, there are two
continuall running streames, pleasantly beset with beauteous trees, which
they call Moly. In framing of which, where they mette any mountaines or
rockes, they have cut, raised and levelled them, and filled all below places
with lime and stone. At the ende of every dayes journey as stations, there
are built stately great pallaces, plenteously stored with all manner of
victuals, apparrell and arms, as well for dayelie wayfaring men as for such
armies that might happen to pass that way. In the estimation of which work
I have especially considered the difficulty, which in that place is particularly
to be remembred. For they built with no stones that were less then ten
foote square: they had no other means to cary or transport them then by
meere strength of arms to draw and dragge the carriage they needed: they
had not so much as the arte to make scaffolds, nor knew other devise then to
raise so much earth or rubbish against their building according as the work
riseth, and afterward to take it away again. But return we to our coaches.
In steade of them and of all other carrying beastes, they caused themselves
to be carryed by men, and upon their shoulders. This last King of Peru, the
same day he was taken, was thus carried upon rafters or beames of massive
Golde, sitting in a fair chaire of state, likewise all of golde, in the middle of
his battaile. Looke how many of his porters as were slain to make him fall
(for all their endeavor was to take him alive) so many others, and as it were
avye, took and underwent presently the place of the dead: so that they
could never be brought down or made to falle, what slaughter soever was
made of those kind of people, until such time as a horseman furiously
ranne to take him by some part of his body, and so pulled him to the ground.




Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER VII: OF THE INCOMMODITIE OF GREATNESSE






CHAPTER VII: OF THE INCOMMODITIE OF GREATNESSE
INCE WE cannot attaine unto it, let us revenge ourselves with railing
against it: yet is it not absolute railing to find fault with any thing:
There are defects found in all things, how fair soever in show and
desirable they be. It has generally this evident advantage, that
whenever it pleaseth it will decline, and has well-nigh the choise of
one and other condition. For a man does not fall from all heights; diverse
there are whence a man may descend without falling. Verily, me
seems that we value it at too high a rate, and prize over-dear the resolution of those
whom we have either seen or heard to have contemned, or of their own motion rejected
the same. Her essence is not so evidently commodious but a man may refuse it without
wonder. Indeed I find the labor very hard in suffering of evils; but in the contentment of
a meane measure of fortune and shunning of greatness, therein I see no great difficillty.
In my conceit it is a virtue whereunto my self, who am but a simple ninny, might easily
attaine, and without great contention. What shall they do who would also bring into
consideration the glory which accompanieth this refusall, wherein may fall more ambition
then even in the desire and absolute enjoying of greatness? Forasmuch as ambition is
never better directed according to itself then by a straying and unfrequented path. I

sharpen my courage toward patience, and weaken the same against desire. I have as much
to wish for as another, and leave my wishes as much liberty and indiscretion; but yet it
never came into my mind to wish for Empire, for Royalty, or eminency of high and
commanding fortunes. I aime not that way: I love my self too well. When I think to
grow, It is but meanly, with a forced and coward advancement, fit for me; indeed in
resolution, in wisdom, in health, in beauty, and also in riches. But this credite, this
aspiring reputation, this overswaying authority, suppresseth my imagination. And cleane
opposite to some other, I should perhaps love my self better to be the second or
third man in Perigot then the first in Paris; At least, without faining, I had rather be the
third man in Paris then the first in charge. I will neither contend with an Usher of a doore,
as a silly unknowen man; nor with gaping and adoration make a Lane through the throng
as I pass. I am enured to a meane calling; mediocrity best fitteth me, as well by my
fortune as by my own humor. And I have showed by the conduct of my life and course
of my enterprises, that I have rather sought to avoid then otherwise to embrace beyond the
degree of fortune that at my birth it pleased God to call me unto. Each natural constitution
is equally just and easy. My mind is so dull and slowe that I measure not good fortune
according to her height, but rather according to her facility. And if my hart be not great
enough, it is ratably free and open, and who biddeth me bouldly to publish my weaknesse.
Should any will me, on the one part, to conferre and consider the life of L. Thurius Balbus,
a worthy gallant man, wise, fair, goodly, healthy, of good understanding, richly plenteous
in all manner of commodities and pleasures, leading a quiet easefull life, altogether his
own, with a mind armed and well prepared against death, superstition, griefes, cares and
other encombrances of humane necessity; dying in his old age in an honorable battle,
with his weapons in his hand, for the defense of his countrie; and on the other side the life
of M. Regulus, so high and great, as all men know, together with his admirable and
glorious end: the one unmentioned and without dignity, the other exemplare and
wonderful renouned: truly I would say what Cicero says of it, had I the gift of well-
speaking as he had. But if I were to sute them unto mine, I would also say that the former
is as much agreeing to my quality, and to the desire I endeavor to conforme my quaiity
unto, as the second is far beyond it. That to this I cannot attaine but by veneration; and
to the other I would willingly attaine by custom. But return we to our temporall
greatness, whence we have digressed. I am distasted of all mastry, both active and
passive. Otanes, one of the seaven that by right might chalenge the crowne or pretend the
Kingdome of Persia, resolved upon such a resolution as I should easily have done the like,
which was, that he utterly renounced all manner of claime he might in any sort pretend unto
that crowne to his fellow competitores, were it either by election or chance: alwayes
provided that both himself and all his might live in that Empire free from all subjections
and exempted from all manner of commandement, except that of the ancient laws, and
might both challenge all liberty and enjoy all immunities that should not prejudice them:
being as impacient to command as to be commanded. The sharpest and most dificile
profession of the world is (in mine opinion) worthily to act and play the king. I excuse
more of their faults then commonly other men do; and that in consideration of the down-
bearing waight of their immense charge, which much astonisheth me, It is a very hard task

to keep a due measure in so unmeasurable a power. Yet is it, that even with those that are
of a less excellent nature it is a singular incitation to virtue to be seated in such a place
where you shall do no manner of good that is not registred and recorded, and where the
least well-dooing extendeth to so many persons, and where your sufficiency (as that of
Preachers) is principally directed to the people; a weake and partiall judge, easily to be
beguiled, and easy to be pleased. There are but few things of which we may give a sincere
judgement; for there be very few wherein in some sort or other we are not particularly
interessed. Superiority and inferiority, maistry and subjection, are joyntly tied unto a
natural kind of envy and contestation; they must perpetually enter-spoile one another. I
believe neither the one nor the other concerning her companions rights: let us suffer
reason to speak of it) which is inflexible and impassible, when or how we shall make an
end. I was not long since reading of two Scottish bookes striving upon this subject. The
popular makes the King to be of worse condition then a Carter; and he that extolleth,
Monarchy placeth him both in power and soveraignty many steps above the Gods. Now
the incommodity if greatness, which here I have undertaken to note and to speak of
(upon some occasion lately befalne me), is this: There is perhaps nothing more
pleasing to the commerce of men then the Essayes which we through jealousie of honor
or valor make one against another, be it in the exercise of the body or mind wherein
sovereign greatness has no true or essentiall part. Verily, it has often seemed unto me,
that through over-much respect Princes are therein used disdainefully and treated
injuriously; For the thing whereat (in my youth) I was infinitely offended was, that those
which were trained and schooled with me, should forbeare to do it in good earnest,
because they found me unworthy to be withstood or to resist their endevours. It is that we
dayly see to happen unto them; every man finding himself unworthy to force himself
against them. If one perceive them never so little affected to have the victory, there is
none but will strive to yield it them, and that will not rather wrong his glory then offend
theirs: no man employeth more diligence then needs he must to serve their honor. What
share have Princes in the throng, where all are for them? Mee thinks I see those Paladines
of former ages presenting themselves in joustes, tiltings and combates, with bodies and
arms enchanted. Brisson running against Alexander, counterfeited his course; Alexander
chid him for it; but he should have caused him to be whipt. For this consideration was
Carneades wont to say, that ’Princes children learn’t nothing aright but to mannage and
ride horses; forasmuch as in all other exercises every man yieldeth and gives them the
victory; but a horse who is neyther a flatterer nor a Courtier, will as soone throw the
child of a King as the son of a base porter.’ Homer has been forced to consent that
Venus (so sweet a saint and delicate a Goddesse) should be hurt at the siege of Troy,
thereby to ascribe courage and hardinesse unto her, qualities never seen in those that are
exempted from danger. The Gods themselves are feigned to be angry, to fear, to be
jealous, to grieve, to show passion, and be subject to mortal sense, thereby to honor
them with the vertues which the Poets and Philosophers invent amongst us: Nay, they are
supposed to run away, and to have a feeling of all our imperfections. Who does not
participate both hazard and difficulties, cannot justly pretend interest in the honor, or
challenge share in the pleasure that followeth dangerous actions or hazardous attempts. it

is pity a man should be so powerfull, that all things must yield and give place unto him.
Such as are in so high eminency of greatness, their fortune rejects society and
conversation too far from them: she placeth them in over remote and uncouth places.
This easefull life and plausible facility to bring all under, and subject mens mindes, is an
enemy to all manner of Pleasure. It is a kind of sliding, and not a going: It is to sleepe
and not to live. Conceive man accompanied with omnipotency, you overwhelme him: he
must in begging manner crave some empeachment and resistance of you. His being and
his food is in want and indigence. Their good qualities are dead and lost, for they are not
heard but by comparison, and they are excluded: they have little knowledge of true praise,
being beaten with so continuall and uniform an approbation. Have they to do with the
simplest of their subjects? They have no meane to take advantage of him if he but say, It is
because he is my King, he supposeth to have sufficiently expressed, and you must
understand that in so saying he has lent a helping hand to overthrow himself. This
quality suppresseth and consumeth all other true and essentiall qualities: they are even
drowned in the Royaltie; which gives them no leave to make the offices of their charge to
prevaile, except in such actions as directly concerne and stead the same. To be a King is a
matter of that consequence, that only by it he is so. That strange glimmering and eye-
dazeling light which round about environeth, overcasteth and hideth from us: or weake
sight is thereby bleared and dissipated, as beeing filled and obscured by that greater and
further-spredding brightnesse. The Senate allotted the honor and prize of eloquence unto
Tiberius; he refused it, supposing that if it had been true, he could not revenge himself
of so limited and partiall judgement. As we yield Princes all advantages of bonor, so we
aucthorize their defects and sooth-up their vices; not only by approbation, but also by
imitation. All Alexanders followers bare their heads sideling, as he did. And such as
flattered Dionysius in his own presence did run and jostle one another, and either
stumbled at or over-threw what ever stood before their feete, to inferre that they were as
short-sighted or spur-blinde as he was. Naturall imperfections have sometimes served for
commendation and favor. Nay, I have seen deafnesse affected. And because the maister
hated his wife, Plutarch has seen courtiers to sue a divorce of tbeirs, whom they loved
very well. And which is more, paillardise and all manner of dissolution has thereby been
held in credit; as also disloyalty, blasphemy, cruelty, heresie, superstition, irreligion,
wantonnesse, and worse, if worse may be. Yea, by an example more dangerous then that
of Mithridates his flatterers, who for so much as their master pretended to have skill in
phisick and aspired to the honor of a good Physition, came to him to have their members
incized and cauterized. For these others suffer to have their soules cauterized; a much
more precious and nobler part then the body. But to end where I began: Adrian the
Emperor, debating with Favorinus the Philosopher about the interpretation of some word,
Favorinus did soone yield the victory unto him, his friends finding fault with him for it:
’you but jest, my masters’ (quoth he); ’would you not have him to be much wiser than I,
who has the absolute command over thirty legions?’ Augustus wrote some verses against
Asinius Pollio, which Pollio hearing, he said, ’I will hold my peace; for it is no wisdom
to contend in writing with him who may proscribe.’ And they had reason; for Dionysius,
because he could not equall Philoxenus in poesie, nor match Plato in discourse,

condemned the one to the stone-quarries, and sent the other to be sold as a slave in the Ile
of Aegina.



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER VIII: OF THE ART OF CONFERRING






CHAPTER VIII: OF THE ART OF CONFERRING
T IS a custom of our law to condemne some for the warning of others.
To condemne them because they have misdone were folly, as says
Plato. For what is once done can never be undone: but they are
condemned to the end that they should not offend a gain, or that other,
may avoide the example of their offence. ’He who is hanged is not
corrected, but others by him.’ Even so do I. My errors are sometimes
natural, incorrigible, and remedilesse. But whereas honest men profit the Common wealth
in causing themselves to be imitated, I shall happily benefit the same in making my self
to be evitated.
Nonne vides Albi ut male vivat filius, utque
Barrus inops magnum documentum, ne patriam rem
Perdere quis velit. -- HOR. Ser. i. sect. iv. 109.
Doe you not see how that mans son lives badly,
That man’s a beggar by his spending madly?

A lesson great, that none take joy: His patrimony to destroy.
By publishing and accusing my imperfections, some man may perhaps learne to
fear them. The parts I most esteeme in my self, reape more honor by accusing then by
commending my self. And that’s the cause I more often fall into them again and rest
upon them. But when all the cards be told, a man never speaks of himself without
loss. A mans own condemnations are ever increased: praises ever decreased. There may
be some of my complexion, who am better instructed by contrariety then by similitude;
and more by escaping then by following. Cato senior had a speciall regard to this kind of
discipline when he said that wisemen have more to learne of fooles then fooles of
wisemen. And that ancient player on the Lyra, whom Pausanias reporteth to have been
accustomed to compell his schollers sometimes to go hear a bad Player, who dwelt right
over-against him, where they might learne to hate his discords and false measures. The
horror of cruelty draws me nearer unto clemency then any patterne of clemency can
possibly win me. A cunning rider or skilfull horseman does not so properly teach me to sit
well on horsebacke, as does one of our Lawyers, or a Venetian by seeing him ride. And an
ill manner of speech does better reforme mine then any well polished form of speaking.
The sottish countenance of another does daily advertise and forewarn me; that which
pricketh, toucheth, and rouzeth better, then that which delighteth. These times are fit to
reforme us backward, more by dissenting then by consenting more by difference then by
accord. Being but little instructed by good examples, I make use of bad; the lesson of
which is ordinary. I have endeavoured, nay I have laboured, to yield my self as pleasing
and affable as I saw others peevish and froward; as constant, as I saw others variable; as
gentle and mild, as I perceived others intractable and wild; and as good and honest, as I
discerned others wicked and dishonest. But I proposed certain invincible measures unto
my self. The most fruitfull and natural exercise of our spirit is, in my self-pleasing
conceit, conference. The use whereof I find to be more delightsome then any other action
of our life: And that’s the reason why, if I were now forced to choose (being in the mind I
now am in), I would rather yield to lose my sight then forgoe my bearing or my speech.
The Athenians and also the Romans did ever hold this exercise in high honor and
reputation, namely, in their Academies. And at this day the Italians do yet keep a kind
of form and trace of it, to their great profit, as may apparently be discerned by comparing
their wits unto ours. The study and plodding on bookes is a languishing and weake kind
of motion, and which heateth or earnesteth nothing; whereas conference does both learne,
teach and exercise at once. If I conferre with a stubborne wit and encounter a sturdy
wrestler, he toucheth me to the quick, hits me on the flanks, and pricks me both on the
left and right side; his imaginations vanquish and confound mine. Jelousie, glory and
contention drive, cast and raise me above my self. And an unison or consent is a quality
altogether tedious and wearisome in conference. But as our mind is fortified by the
communication of regular and vigorous spirits, it cannot well be expressed how much it
loses and is bastardized by the continuall commerce and frequentation we have with
base, weake and dull spirits. No contagion spreds itself further then that. I know by long
experience what an ell of it is worth. I love to contest and discourse, but not with many,

and only for my self. For to serve as a spectacle unto great men, and by way of
contention for one to make a glorious show of his ready wit and running tongue. I deem
it a profession far unfitting a man of honor. Sottishnes is an ill quality, but not to be able
to endure it, and to fret and vex at it, as it happens to me, is another kind of imperfection
which in opportunity is not much behind sottishnes; and that’s it I will now accuse in my
self. I do with great liberty and facility enter into conference and disputation; forasmuch
as opinion findes but a hard soile to enter and take any deepe roote in me. No propositions
amaze me, no conceit woundeth me, what contrariety soever they have to mine. There is
no fantazie so frivolous or humor so extravagant, that in mine opinion is not sortable to
the production of humane wit. We others, who debarre our judgement of the right to
make conclusions, regard but negligently the diverse opinions: and if we lend it not our
judgement, we easily affoord it our ears. Where one scale of the balance is altogether
empty, I let the other waver too and fro, under an old wives dreames. And me seems I
may well be excused if I rather except an odde number than an even: Thursday in respect
of Friday, if I had rather make a twelfth or fourteenth at a table, then a thirteenth; if when I
am travelling I would rather see a Hare coasting then crossing my way; and rather reach
my left then my right foote to be shod. All such foolish conceits, now in credit abo ut us,
deserve at least to be listned unto. As for me, they only bear away inanity, and surely
they do so. Vulgar and casual opinions are yet of some waight, which in nature are
something els then nothing. And who wadeth not so far into them to avoid the vice of
superstition, falleth happily into the blame of wilfulnesse. The contradictions then of
judgements do neither offend nor move, but awaken and exercise me. We commonly
shunne correction, whereas we should rather seek and present ourselves unto it, chiefly
when it commeth by the way of conference, and not of regency. At every opposition we
consider not whether it be just, but be it right or wrong, how we may avoide it; In stead of
reaching our arms, we stretch forth our clawes unto it. I should endure to be rudely
handled and checked by my friends, though they should call me foole, coxecombe, or say
I raved. I love a man that does stoutly express himself amongst honest and worthy men,
and whose words answere his thoughts. We should fortifie and harden our hearing against
the tenderness of the ceremonious sound of words. I love a friendly society and a virile
and constant familiarity; An amitie which in the earnestnesse and vigor of its commerce
flattereth itself: as love in bitings and bloody scratchings. It is not sufficiently generous
or vigorous, except it be contentious and quarrelous; if she be civilised and a skilfull artist;
if it fear a shocke or free encounter, and have her starting holes or forced by-ways.
Neque enim disputari sine reprehensione potest: ’Disputation cannot be held without
reprehension.’ When I am impugned or contraried, then is mine attention and not mine
anger stirred up. I advance my self toward him that does gainesay and instruct me. The
cause of truth ought to be the common cause both to one and other. What can he answer?
The passion of choller has already wounded his judgement: before reason has seized
upon it. It were both profitable and necessary that the determining of our disputations
might be decided by way of wagers, and that there were a materiall marke of our losses;
that we might better remember and make more accompt of it; and that my boy might say
unto me: Sir, if you call to mind your contestation, your ignorance, and your self-

wilfulnesse, at severall times, cost you a hundred crownes the last yeare: I feast, I cherish
and I embrace truth, where and in whom soever I find it, and willingly and merily yield
my self unto her, as soone as I see but her approach, though it be a far-off, I lay down
my weapon and yield my self vanquished. And alwayes provided one persist not or
proceede therein, with an over-imperious stiffnesse or commanding surlinesse, I am well
pleased to be reprooved. And I often accommodate my self unto my accusers more by
reason of civility then by occasion of amendment: loving by the facility of yielding to
gratifie and foster their liberty, to teach or advertise me. It is notwithstanding no easy
matter to draw men of my times unto it. They have not the courage to correct, because
they want the heart to endure correction; and ever speak with dissimulation in presence
one of another. I take so great a pleasure to be judged and known, that it is indifferent to
me in whether of the two formes I be so. Mine own imagination does so often contradict
and condemne itself, that if another do it, all is one unto me; especially seeing I give his
reprehension no other authority then I list. But I shall breake a straw or fall at ods with
him, that keepes himself so aloft; as I know some that will fret and chafe if their opinions
be not believed, and who take it as an injury, indeed fall out with their best friends, if
they will not follow it. And that Socrates, ever smiling, made a collection of such
contradictions as were opposed to his discourse, one might say his force was cause of it,
and that the advantage being assuredly to fall on his side, he took them as a subject of a
new victory; nevertheless we see on the contrary that nothing does so nicely yield our
sense unto it as the opinion of preheminence and disdaine of the adversary. And that by
reason it rather befits the weakest to accept of opposition in good part, which restore and
repair him. Verily I seek more the conversation of such as curbe me, then of those that
fear me. It is an unsavory and hurtful pleasure to have to do with men who admire and
give us place. Antisthenes commanded his children never to be beholding unto or thanke
any that should commend them. I feel my self more lusty and cranke for the victory I
gain over my self, when in the heate or fury of the combate I perceive to bend and fall
under the power of my adversaries reason, then I am pleased with the victory I obtain of
him by his weakenesse. To conclude, I receive all blowes and allow all attaints given
directly, how weake soever; but am very impatient at such as are strucken at randan and
without order. I care but little for the matter, and with me opinions are all one, and the
victory of the subject in a manner indifferent: I shall quietly contest a whole day, if the
conduct of the controversie be followed with order and decorum. It is not force nor
subtilty that I so much require, as form and order. The form and order dayly seen in the
altercations of shepheards, or contentions of shop-prentise boyes; but never amongst us. If
they part or give one another over, it is with incivilitie; and so do we. But their
wrangling, their brawling and impatience, cannot make them to forgoe or forget their
theame.
Their discourse holds on his course. If they prevent one another, if they stay not for, at
least they understand one another. A man does ever answere sufficiently well for me if he
answere what I say. But when the disputation is confounded and orderlesse, I quit the
matter and betake me to the form, with spight and indiscretion; and embrace a kind of
debating, teasty, headlong, malicious and imperious, whereat I afterward blush. It is

impossible to treate quietly and dispute orderly with a foole. My judgement is not only
corrupted under the hand of so imperious a maister, but my conscience also. Our
disputations ought to be forbidden and punished, as other verball crimes. What vice raise
they not, and heape up together, being ever swayed and commanded by choller? First we
enter into enmity with the reasons, and then with the men. We learne not to dispute,
except it be to contradict; and every man contradicting and being contradicted, it
commonly followeth that the fruit of disputing is to loose and to disanull the trueth. So
Plato in his common wealth forbiddeth foolish, unapt and base-minded spirits to
undertake that exercise. To what purpose go you about to quest or enquire that which is
with him who has neither good pace nor proceeding of woorth? No man wrongs the
subject when he quits the same for want of means to treat or mannage it. I meane not a
scholasticall and artist meane, but intend a natural meane, and of a sound understanding.
What will the end be? one goeth Eastward and another Westward: They loose the
principal, and stray it in the throng of incidents. At the end of an hours wrangling they
wot not what they seek for: one is high, another low, and another wide. Some take hold
of a word, some of a similitude. Some forget what was objected against them, so much are
they engaged in the pursuite, and think to follow themselves, and not you. Some finding
themselves weake-backt, fear all, refuse all, and at the very entrance mingle the subject
and confound the purpose; or in the heate of the disputation mutiny to hold their peace
altogether: through a spightfull ignorance, affecting a proud kind of contempt, or a
foolish modesty avoyding of contention. Provided that one strike and hit, he c areth not
how open he lie. Another compteth his words, and wayeth them for reasons; Another
employeth nothing but the advantage of his voice and winde. Here one concludeth against
himself; here another wearyeth you with idle prefaces and frivolous digressions. Another
armeth himself afore hand with injuries, and seekes after a Dutch quarrell, to rid himself
of the society and shake off the conference of a spirit that presseth and overbeareth his.
This last has no insight at all in reason, but still beleagreth you with the dialecticall or
logicall close of his clause, and ties you to the rule of his arte or form of his skill. Now
who does not enter into distrust of sciences, and is not in doubt, whether in any necessity
of life he may reape solid fruit of them, if he consider the use we have of them? Nihil
sanantibus literis: Since learning does not cure. Who has learnt any wit or understanding
in Logique? Where are her fair promises? Nec ad melius vivendum, nec ad commodius
disserendum: Neither to live better or to dispute fitter. Shall a man bear more brabling or
confusion in the tittle-tattle of fish wives or scoulding sluts, then in the public
disputations of men of this profession? I had rather my child should learne to speak in a
Taverne then in the schooles of well-speaking Art. Take you a maister of arts, and
conferre with him, why does he not make us perceive his artificiall excellency, and by the
admiration of his reasons-constancy, or with the beauty of his quaint order and grace of
his method, ravish silly women, and bleare ignorant men as we are? Why does he not
sway, winde and persuade us as he list? Why should one so advantageous in matter and
conduct entermixe injuries, indiscretion and chollericke rage with his fence? Let him pull
of his two-faced hoode, his gowne and his latine, let him not fill our ears with meerely
beleeved Aristotle, you will discover and take him for one of us, and worse if may be. Me

thinks this implication and entangling of speech, wherewith they do so much importune
us, may fitly be compared unto juglers play of fast and loose; their nimblenesse combats
and forceth our sences, but it nothing shaketh our beliefe: Take away their jugling, what
they do is but base, common and slight. Though they be more witty and nimble spirited,
they are not tthe less foolish, simple and unapt. I love wit and honor wi sedome as much
as them that have it. And beeing rightly used, it is the noblest, the most forcible, indeed
richest purchase men can make. But in such (of which kind the number is infinit) that
upon it establish their fundamentall sufficiency and worth: that from their wit refer
themselves to their memory, sub aliena umbra latentes: reposing them under another
mans protection, and can do nothing but by the book (if I may be bold to say so) I hate
the same a little more then sottishnes. In my country and in my dayes learning and
bookishnes does much mend purses, but minds nothing at all. If it chance to find them
empty, light and dry, it filleth, it overburthens and swelleth them: a raw and indigested
masse; if thinne, it does easily purifie, clarifie, extenuate and subtilize them even unto
exinanition or evacuation. It is a thing of a quality very neare indifferent: a most profitable
accessory or ornament unto a well-borne mind, but pernicious and hurtfully damageable
unto any other or rather a thing of most precious use, that will not basely be gotten nor
vily possessed. In some hands a royall scepter, in other some a rude mattocke. But let us
proceed. What greater or more glorious victory can you expect, then teach your enemy
that he cannot withstand you? When you gain the advantage of your proposition, it is
Truth that winneth; when you get the advantage of the order and conduct, it is you that
winne. I am of opinion that both in Plato and in Xenophon, Socrates disputeth more in
favor of the disputers then in grace of the disputation; and more to instruct Euthydemus
and Protagoras with the knowledge of the impertinency of their art. He takes hold of the
first matter, as who has a more profitable end, then to clear it; that is, to clear the spirits
he undertaketh to manage and to exercise. Agitation, stirring and hunting, is properly
belonging to our subject or drift; we are not excusable to conduct the same ill and
impertinently, but to misse the game and faile in taking, that’s another matter. For we are
borne to quest and seek after trueth; to possesse it belongs to a greater power. It is not
(as Democritus said) hidden in the deepes of abisse; but rather elevated in infinite height
of divine knowledge. The world is but a School of inquisition. The matter is not who
shall put in, but who shall run the fairest courses. As well may he play the foole that
speaks truely as he that speaks falsely; for we are upon the manner and not upon the
matter of speaking. My humor is, to have as great a regard to the form as to the
substance; as much respect to the Advocat as to the cause; as Alcibiades appointed we
should do. And I dayly ammuse my self to read in authors, without care of their
learning; therein seeking their manner, not their subject. Even as I pursue the
communication of some famous wit, not that he should teach me, but that I may know
him; and knowing him (if he deserve it) I may immitate him. Every one may speak
truely, but to speak orderly, methodically, wisely and sufficiemtly, few can do it. So
falsehood proceeding from from ignorance does not offend me; ineptnesse and trifling
does. I have broken off diverse bargaines, that would have been very commodious unto
me, by the impertinency of their contestation, with whom I did bargaine. I am not mooved

once a yeare, with the faults or oversights of those over whom I have power: but touching
the point of the sottishnesse and foolishnes of their allegations, excuses, and defences,
rude and brutish, we are every day ready to go by the ears. They neither understand
what is said nor why, and even so they answer; a thing able to make one despaire. I
feel not my head to shocke hard but by being hit with another. And I rather enter into
composition with my peoples vices, then with their rashnesse, importunity and
foolishnesse. Let them do less, provided they be capable to do. You live in hope to
enflame their will. But of a blocke there is nothing to be hoped for, nor any thing of worth
to be enjoyed. Now, what if I take things otherwise then they are? So it may be; and
therefore I accuse my impatience. And first Ihould that it is equally vicious in him who is
in the right as in him that is in the wrong; For it is ever a kind of tyrannical sharpenesse
not to be able to endure a form different from his; and verily, since there is not a greater
fondnesse, a more constant gullishnesse, or more heteroclite insipidity then for one to
move or vex himself at the fondnesse, at the gullishnesse, or insipidity of the world: For
it principally formalizeth and moveth us against ourselves; and that Philosopher of former
ages should never have wanted occasion to weepe so long as he had considered himself.
Miso, one of the seaven sages (a man of a Timonian disposition and Democraticall
humor) being demanded where-at he laughed alone, be answered, because I laugh alone;
how many follies do I speak and answer every day, according to my self; and then how
much more frequent according to others? And if I bite my own lips at them, what ought
others to do? In fine, we must live with the quick, and let the water run under the
bridge, without any care, or at least without alteration to us. In good sooth, why meet we
sometimes with crooked, deformed, and in body mishapen men, without falling into rage
and discontent, and cannot endure to light-upon a froward, skittish, and ill-ranged spirit,
without falling into anger and vexation? This vicious austerity is rather in the Judge then
in the fault. Let us ever have that saying of Plato in our mouthes: What I find
unwholsome, is it not to be unhealthy my self? Am not I in fault my self? May not mine
own advertisement be retorted against my self? Oh wise and divine restraint, that
curbeth the most universall and common error of men. Not only the reproches we do
one to another, but our reasons, our arguments and matter controversed, are ordinarily
retortable unto us; and we pinch ourselves up in our own arms. Whereof antiquity has
left me diverse grave examples. It was ingeniously spoken and fit to the purpose by him
that first devised the same:
Stercus cuique suum bene olet. -- ERAS. Chil. iii. cent. iv. ad. 2.
Ev’ry mans ordure well, To his own sense does smell.
Our eyes see nothing backward. A hundred times a day we mocke ourselves upon our
neigbbours subject, and detest some defects in others that are much more apparent in us;
indeed, and admire them with a strange impudency and unheedinesse. Even yesterday I
chanced to see a man of reasonable understanding, who no less pleasantly then justly
flouted at anothers foolish fashion, and yet upon every silly occasion does nothing but

molest all men with the impertinent bedrowle and register of his pedigrees, genealogies
and alliances, more then halfe false and wrested in (for it is the manner of such people
commonly to undertake such foolish discourses, whose qualities are more doubtfull and
less sure); who if be had impartially considered and looked upon himself, should
doubtlesse have found himself no less intemperate, indiscreet, and tedious, in publishing
and extolling the prerogative of his wives pedigree and descent. Oh importunate
presumption, wherewith the wife seeth herself armed by the hands of her own husband.
If he understand Latin, a man should say to him,
Age, si hæc non insanit satis sua sponte, instiga. -- TER. And. act. iv. sc. 2.
Goe too, if of her own accord before,
She were not mad enough, provoke her more.
I say not that none should accuse except he be spotlesse in himself; For then none
might accuse: no not spotlesse in the same kind of fault. But my meaning is, that our
judgement charging and blaming another, of whom there is then question, spareth us
nothing of an inward and severe jurisdiction. It is an office of charity, that he who cannot
remove a vice from himself, should nevertheless endeavor to remove it from others,
where it may have a less hurtful and froward seed. Nor do I deem it a fit answer for
him that warneth me of my fault, to say the same is likewise in him. But what of that?
Well meaning warning is alwayes true and profitable. Had we a good and sound nose, our
own ordure should be more unsavory unto ourselves, forasmuch as it is our own. And
Socrates is of opinion that he who should find himself, and his son, and a stranger guilty
of any violence or injury, ought first begin by himself, and present himself to the
sentence and condemnation of the law, and for his own discharge and acquital implore
the assistance of the executioners hand: secondly, for his son, and lastly, for the stranger.
If this precept take his tune somewhat too high, it should at lest be first presented to the
punishment of one’s own conscience. Our senses are our proper and first judges, who
distinguish not things, but by externall accidents; and no marvell, if in all parts of the
service belonging to our society there is so perpetuall and universall commixture of
ceremonies and superficiall apparances; so that the best and most effectuall part of
policies consists in that. It is man with whom we have alwayes to do, whose condition is
marvellously corporall. Let those who in these latter dayes have so earnestly laboured to
frame and establish unto us an exercise of Religion and Service of God, so contemplative
and immateriall, ponder nothing at all if some be found who think it would have escaped
and moultred away betweene their fingers, if it had not held and continued amongst us, as
a marke, a title, and instrument of division and faction, more then by itself. As in
conference, The gravity, the gowne, and the fortune of him that speaks, does often adde
and winne credit unto vain, trifling, and absurd discourses. It is not to be presumed that
one of these gowne-Clarkes or quoifed Serjants, so followed and so redoubled, have not
some sufficiency within him more then popular: and that a man so sullen, so grim, and so
disdainfull, to whom so many commissions, charges, and authorities are given, be not

more sufficient and worthy then another who saluteth and vaileth to him so far-off, and
whom no man employeth. Not only the words, but the powtings of such people are
considered and registred, every one applying himself to give them some notable and
solid interpretation. If they stoop to common conference, and that a man affoord or
show them other then reverence and approbation, they overthrow you with the autority of
their experience: they have read, they have heard, seen, and done goodly things, you are
cleane overwhelmed with examples. I would faine tell them that the fruit of a Chirurgion’s
experience is not the story of his practises, or the remembrance that he has cured foure
who had the Plague, and healed as many that had the Goute, except he know and have
the wit, from his use and experience, to draw a methode how to frame his judgements, and
by his skill and practise make us perceave he is become wiser in his art. As in a consort
of instruments, one heares not severally a Lute, a Vyol, a Flute, or a pair of Virginalles,
but a perfect-full harmony: the assembly and fruit of all those instruments in one. If their
travels and charges have amended them, it is in the production of their understanding to
make it appeare. It sufficeth not to number the experiments; they ought to be well poised
and orderly sorted: and to extract the reasons and conclusions they containe, they should
be well disgested and thorowly distilled. There were never so many Historians. It is ever
good and profitable to hear them; for out of the magazin of their memory they store us
with diverse good instructions and commendable documents. Verily a chief part, for the
assistance of our life. But now a dayes we seek not after that, but rather whether the
Collectors and reporters of them be praise worthy and directing themselves. I hate al
manner of tyranny both verball and effectuall. I willingly band and oppose my self
against these vain and frivolous circumstances, which by the sences delude our
judgement; and holding my self aloofe of from these extraordinary greatnesses, have
found that for the most part they are but men as others be:
Rarus enim ferme sensus communis in illa
Fortuna -- JUV. Sat. viii. 73
For common sense is seldom found In fortunes that so much abound.
They are, perhaps, esteemed and discerned less then they be, forasmuch as they
undertake more, and so show themselves; they answer not the charge they have taken.
There must necessarily be more vigor and strength in the bearer then in the burden. He
who is not grown to his full strength, leaves you to ghesse whether he have any left him
beyond that, or have been tried to the utmost of his power. He who fainteth under his
burden bewrayeth his measure and the weaknesse of his shoulders. Thats the reason why
amongst the wiser sort there are so many foolish and unapt minds seen, and more then of
others. They might happily have been made good husbandmen, thriving merchants, and
plodding artificers. Their natural vigor was cut out to this proportion. Learning is a
matter of great consequence: they faint under it. To enstall and distribute so rich and so
powerfall a matter, and availefully to employ the same, their wit has neither sufficient
vigor, nor conduct enough to manage it. It has no prevailing virtue but in a strong

nature, and they are very rare; and such as are weake (says Socrates) corrupt and
spoilingly deface the dignity of Philosophy in handling the same . She seems faulty and
unprofitable, being ill placed and unorderly disposed. See here how they spoile and
entangle themselves.
Humani qualis simulator simius oris,
Quem puer arridens, pretioso stamine serum
Velavit, nudasque nates ac terga reliquit,
Ludibrium mensis. -- CLAUD. Eutrop. 1. i. 803.
Such counterfeits as Apes are of mans face,
Whom children sporting at, featly incase
In costly coates, but leave his backeside bare
For men to laugh at, when they feasting are.
To those likewise who sway and command us, and have the world in their own bands, ’tis
not sufficient to have a common understanding, and to be able to do what we can effect.
They are far beneath us, if they be not much above us. As they promise more, so owe
they more. And therefore silence is in them, not only a countenance of respect and
gravitie, but often of thrift and profit. Megabysus going to visite Apelles in his work-
house, stood still a good while without speaking one word, and then began to discourse of
his workes. Of whom he received this rude and nipping cheke: So long as you holdest your
peace, by reason of your garish clothes, goodly chaines and stately pompe, you seemedst
to be some worthy gallant; but now you hast spoken, there is not the simplest boy of my
shop but scorneth and contemns you.’ That great state of his, those rich habiliments and
goodly traine did not permit him to be ignorant with a popular ignorance, and to speak
impertinently of painting. He should have kept mute and concealed his externall and
presuming sufficiency. Unto how many foolish and shallow minds has in my dayes a
sullen, cold, and silent countenance served as a title of wisdom and capacity? Dignities,
charges and places are necessarily given more by fortune then by merit; and they are often
to blame, that for it lay the blame on Kings. Contrariwise it is a wonder that, being so
untoward, they should therein have so good lucke: Principis est virtue maxima nosse suos:
’Chiefe virtue it is known, In Kings to know their own.’ For Nature has not given them
so perfect a sight that it might extend itself and overlooke so many people, to discerne
their pre-excellency; and enter their breasts where lodgeth the knowledge of our will and
better worth. It is by conjectures, and as it were groping they must try us; by our race,
alliances, dependences, riches, learning, and the peoples voice: all over-weake arguments.
He that could devise a meane how men might be judged by law, chosen by reason and
advanced by desert, should establish a perfect form of a commonwealth. Yea but he
has brought that great business unto a good pass. It is to say something, but not to say
sufficiently. For this sentence is justly received, That counsels ought not to be judged by
the events. The Carthaginians were wont to punish the ill counsels of their Captains,
although corrected by some fortunate successes And the Roman people has often refused

triumphes to famous, successfull and most profitable victories, forasmuch as the Generals
conduct answeared not his good fortune. It is commonly perceived by the worlds actions
that fortune, to teach us how far her power extendeth unto all things, and who taketh
pleasure to abate our presumption, having not bin able to make silly men wise, she has
made them fortunate in envy of virtue; and commonly gives herself to favor
executions, when as their complot and devise is meerly hirs. Whence we dayly see that the
simplest amongst us compass diverse great and important affairs, both public and
private. And as Sirannez, the Persian Prince, answered those who seemed to wonder how
his negotiations succeeded so ill, his discourses being so wise, that he was only maister
of his discourses, but fortune mistris of his affairs successes. These may answer the like;
but with a contrary bias. Most things of the world are made by themselves.
Fata viam inveniunt. -- VIRG. Æn. iii. 356.
Fates find and know which way to go.
The issue does often aucthorize a simple conduct. Our interposition is in a manner nothing
els but an experience, and more commonly a consideration of use and example then of
reason. And as one amazed at the greatness of some businesses I have sometimes
understood by those who had atchieved them, both their motives and addresses: wherein I
have found but vulgar advises: and the most vulgar and used are perhaps the surest
and most commodious for the practice, if not for the show. And what if the plainest
reasons, are the best seated, the meanest, basest and most beaten, are best applied unto
affairs? To maintaine the authority of our Kings counsell it is not requisite that prophane
persons should be partakers of it, and looke further into it then from the first barre. To
uphold its reputation, it should be reverenced upon credit, and at full. My consultation
does somewhat roughly hew the matter, and by its first show, lightly consider the same:
the main and chief point of the work I am wont to resigne to heaven.
Permitte, divis cætera. -- HOR. i. Od. ix. 9.
How all the rew shall go,
Give leave to Gods to know.
Good and bad fortune are in my conceit two sovereign powers. ’Tis folly to think that
humane wisdom may act the full part of fortune. And vain is his enterprise that
presumeth to embrace both causes and consequences, and lead the progresse of his fact by
the hand. And above all, vainest in military deliberations. There was never more
circumspection and military wisdom then is sometimes seen amongst us: may it be that
man feareth to lose himself by the way, reserving himself to the catastrophe of that
play? I say, moreover, that even our wisdom and consultation for the most part followeth
the conduct of hazard. My will and my discourse is sometimes mooved by one air and

sometimes by another; and there be many of these motions that are governed without me.
My reason has dayly impulsions and casual agitations:
Vertuntur species animorum, et pectora motus
Nunc alios, alios dum nubila ventus agebat,
Concipiunt. -- VIRG. Geo. iv. 20.
The showes of mindes are chang’d, and brests conceave
At one time motions which anon they leave,
And others take again, As winds drive clouds amaine.
Let but a man looke who are the mightiest in Cities and who thrive best in their business:
he shall commonly find they are the siliest and poorest in wit. It has hapned to simple
women, to weake children, and to mad men to command great states, as well as the most
sufficient Princes. And the gullish or shallow-pated (says Thucidides) do more ordinarily
come unto them then the wisest and subtilest. We ascribe their good fortunes effects unto
their prudence.
------ ut quisque fortuna utitur,
Ita præcellit: atque exinde sapere illum omnes dicimus. -- PLAU. Pse. act
v. sc. 4.
As men their fortune use, so they excel,
And so we say, they are wise and do well.
Wherefore I say well that however events are but weake testimonies of our worth and
capacity. I was now upon this point that we need but looke upon a man advanced to
dignity; had we but three days before known him to be of little or no worth at all: an
image of greatness and an Idea of sufficiency does insensibly glide and creepe into our
opinions; and we persuade ourselves that increasing in state and credit and followers, he
is also increased in merit. We judge of him, not according to his worth, but after the manner
of casting-counters, according to the prerogative of his rank. But let fortune turn her
wheele, let him again decline and come down amongst the vulgar multitude; every one
with admiration enquireth of the cause and how he was raised so high. Good Lord, is that
he? will some say. What, knew he no more? had he no other skill when he was so aloft?
Are Princes pleased with so little? Now in good sooth we were in very good hands, will
others say. It is a thing my self have often seen in my dayes. Yea the very maske of
greatness or habit of Majesty represented in Tragedies does in some sort touch and
beguile us. The thing I adore in Kings is the throng of their adorators. All inclination and
submission is due unto them, except the mindes. My reason is not framed to bend or
stoop: my knees are. Melanthius, being demanded what be thought of Dionysius his
tragedy answered, I have not seen it, so much was it over-clouded with language. So

should those say that judge of great mens discourses: I have not understood his discourse,
so was it overdarkned with gravity, with greatness and with Majesty. Antisthenes one day
persuaded the Athenians to command that their asses should as well be employed about
the manuring of grounds as were their horses who answered him that the asse was not
borne for such service: That’s all one (quoth he), there needs but your allowance for it: for
the most ignorant and incapable men you employ about the directing of your wars leave
not to be come out of hand most worthy only because you employ them. Whereupon
depends the custom of so many men, who canonize the King, whom they have made
amongst them, and are not contented to honor him, unless they also adore him. Those of
Mexico, after the ceremonies of his consecration are finished, dare no more looke him in
the face; but as if by his Royalty they had deified him, they afterward deem him to be a
God: amongst the oathes, they make him sweare to maintaine their Religion, to keep
their Lawes, to defend their liberties, to be valiant, just and debonaire; he is also sworne
to make the Sun march in his accustomed light; in time of need to cause the clouds showre
down their waters; to enforce rivers to run in their right wonted chanels; and compell
the earth to produce all necessary things for his people. I differ from this common fashion,
and more distrust sufficiency, when I see it accompanied with the greatnes of fortune, and
lauded by popular commendation. We should speedfully marke of what consequence it is
for a man to speak in due time, to choose fit opportunity, to breake or change his
discourse with a magistrate authority; to defend himself from others oppositions, by a
nod or moving of the head, by a smile, a shrug, or a silence, before an assembly trembling
with reverence and respect. A man of monstrous fortune, chancing to shoote his boult, and
give his opinion upon a frivolous subject, which but jestingly was tossed too and fro at his
table, began ever thus: he cannot choose but be a lyer, or an ignorant asse, that will say
otherwise then, &amp;c. Follow this Philosophicall point, out commeth a dagger, and there is
some mischief. See here another advertisement, from whence I reape good use; which is,
that in disputations and conferences all good seeming words ought not presently to be
allowed and accepted. Most men are rich of a strange sufficiency. Some may chance to
speak a notable saying, to give a good answere, to use a witty sentence, and to propound
it, without knowing the force of it. That a man holdeth not all he borroweth, may
perhaps be verified in my self. A man should not alwayes yield, what truth or
goodnes soever it seems to containe. A man must either combat the same in good
earnest, or draw back, under colour of not understanding the matter: to try on all parts,
how it is placed in it’s author. It may fortune that we shut ourselves up and further the
stroake, beyond its caring. I have sometimes in necessity and throng of the combat
employed some reviradoes or turnings, which beyond my intent have prooved false offers.
I but gave them by tale, and they were received by waight. Even as when I contend with a
vigourous man, I please my self to anticipate his conclusions; I ease him the labor to
interpret himself; endeavor to prevent his imperfect and yet budding imagination; the
order and pertinency of his understanding forwarneth and menaceth a far off. Of these
others I do cleane contrary; a man must understand or presuppose nothing but by them. If
they judge in general termes: This is is good, that’s naught: and that they jump right, see
whether it be fortune that jumpeth for them. Let them a little circumscribe and restraine

their sentence why it is, and which way it is. These universall judgements I see so
ordinarily say nothing at all. They are men that salute a whole multitude in throng and
troupe. Such as have true knowledge of the same, salute and marks it by name and
particularly. But it is a hazardous enterprise. Whence I have oftner and daily seen to
happen that wits weakly grounded, intending to show themselves ingenious by observing
in the reading of some work the point of beauty, stay their admiration with so bad a
choise, that in lieu of teaching us the authors excellency, they show us their own
ignorance. This manner of exclamation is safe: See this is very excellent: Surely this is very
good; having heard a whole page of Virgil. And that’s the shift whereby the subtill save
themselves. But to undertake to follow him by shrugs and crinches, and with an express
selected judgement to go about to marke which way a good author surmounteth himself;
pondring his words, his phrases, his inventions, and his severall vertues one after another:
Away, go by: It is not for you. Videndum est non modo, quid quisque loquatur, sed etiam
quid quisque sen tiat, atque etiam qua de causa quisque sentiat: ’Man must take heed not
only what he speaks, but what he thinkes, and also why he thinkes.’ I dayly hear fooles
utter unfoolish words. Speake they any good thing; let us understand whence they know it,
how far they understand and whereby they hold it. We helpe them to employ this fine
word and this goodly reason, which they possesse not, and have but in keeping; they have
happily produced the same by chance and at random, ourselves bring it in credit and
esteeme with them. You lend them your hand what to do? to konne you no thankes, and
thereby become more simple and more foolish. Doe not second them: let them go-on:
they will handle this matter as men affraid to bewray themselves, they dare neither change
her seats or light, nor enter into it. Shake it never so little, it escapeth them; quit the same
how strong and goodly soever it be. They are handsome weapons, but ill hafted. How
often have I seen the experience of it! Now if you come to expound and confirme them,
they take hold of you, and presently steale the advantage of your interpretation from you.
It was that which I was about to say: It was just my conceit; If I have not so exprest it, it is
but for want of speech. Handy-dandy, what is this? Malice itself must be employed to
correct this fierce rudenesse. Hegesias his position, that a man must neither hate nor
accuse, but instruct, has some reason else where. But here it is injustice to assist, and
inhumanity to raise him up again, that has nothing to do with it, and is thereby of lesser
worth. I love to have them entangle and bemire themselves more then they are, and if it be
possible to wade so deepe into the gulphe of error, that in the end they may recall and
advise themselves. Sottishnesse and distraction of the senses is no disease curable by a
tricke of advertisment. And we may fitly say of this reparation, as Cyrus answered one
who urged him to exhort his army in the nicke when the battle should begin: ’That men
are not made warlike and courageous in the field by an excellent oration, no more then
one becomes a ready cunning Musition by hearing a good song.’ They are prentisages
that must be learned a forehands by long and constant institution. This care we owe to
ours, and this assiduity of correction and instruction; but to preach to him that first passeth
by, or sway the ignorance or fondnesse of him we meete next, is a custom l cannot well
away with. I seldom use it, even in such discourses as are made to me; and I rather quit
all, then come to these far-fetcht and magistrate instructions. My humor is no more

proper to speak then to write, namely for beginners. But in things commonly spoken, or
amongst others, how false and absurd soever I judge them, I never crosse or gibe them,
neither by word nor signe. Further, nothing does more spight me in sottishnesse then that
it pleaseth itself more then any reason may justly be satisfied. It is ill lucke that
wisdom forbids you to please and trust your self, and sends you alwayes way
discontented and fearefull; whereas wilfulnesse and rashnesse fill their guests with
gratulation and assurance. It is for the simplest and least able to looke at other men over
their shoulders, ever returning from the combat full of glory and gladnesse. And most
often also, this outrecuidance of speech and cheerefulnesse of countenance gives them
the victory over the bystanders, who are commonly weake, and incapable to judge a right
and discerne true advantage. Obstinacy and earnestnesse in opinion is the surest tryall of
folly and self conceit. Is there any thing so assured, so resolute, so disdainfull, so
contemplative, so serious and so grave, as the Asse? May we not commixe with the title of
conference and communication the sharpe and interrupted discourses which mirth and
familiarity introduceth amongst friends, pleasantly dallying and wittily jesting one with
another? An exercise to which my natural blithnesse makes me very apt. And if it be not
so wire-drawne and serious as this other exercise I now speak of, yet is it no less sharpe
or ingenious, no less profitable, as it seemed to Lycurgus. For my regard I bring more
liberty then wit unto it, and have therin more lucke then invention; but I am perfect in
sufferance; for I endure the revenge, not only sharpe but also indiscreete, without any
alteration. And to any assault given me, if I have not presently or stoutly wherewith to
work my own amends, I ammuse not my self to follow that ward or point, with a
tedious and self-wil’d contestation, enclining to pertinacy: I let it pass, and hanging
down mine ears, remit my self to a better hour to right my self. He is not a marchant
that ever gaineth. Most men change both voice and countenance, where might faileth
them: And by an importunate rage, instead of avenging themselves, they accuse their
weaknesse and therewith bewray their impacience. In this jollity we now and then harpe
upon some secret strings of our imperfections, which setled or considerate we cannot
touch without offence, and we profitably enter-advertize ourselves of our defects. There
are other handy-sports indiscreete, foolish and sharpe, just after the French manner, which I
hate mortally; I have a tender and sensible skinne: I have in my days seen two Princes of
our Royall blood brought to their graves for it. It is an ill seeming thing for men in jest to
hitte, or in sport to strike one another. In other matters, when I shall judge of any body, I
demaund of him how far or how much he is contented with himself; how far his
speach or his work pleaseth him. I will avoyd these goodly excuses, I did it but in jest:
Ablatum mediis opus est incudibus istud. -- OVID. Trist. 1. i. Eleg. vi. 29.
This work away was brought,
Halfe hamm ered, halfe wrought.
I was not an hour there: I have not seen him since. Now I say, let us then leave these
partes; give me one that may represent you whole and entire, by which it may please you

to be measured by another. And then, what find you fairest in your own work? Is it that
or this part? The grace or the matter, the invention, the judgement, or the learning? For I
ordinarily perceive that a man misseth as much in judging of his own work as of
anothers. Not only by the affection he therein employeth, but because be has not
sufficiencie to know, nor skill to distinguish it. The work of its own power and fortune
may second the workeman, and transport him beyond his invention and knowledge. As for
me, I judge not the worth of anothers work more obscurely then of my own; and place
my Essayes sometime lowe, sometimes high, very unconstantly and doubtfully. There are
diverse bookes profitable by reason of their subjects, of which the author reapeth no
commendations at all; And good bookes, as also good workes, which make the workeman
ashamed. I shall write the manner of our bankets and the fashion of our garments, and I
shall write it with an ill grace: I shall publish the Edicts of my time, and the letters of
Princes that publikely pass from hand to hand: I shall make an abridgement of a good
book (and every abridgement of a good book is a foole abridged), which book shall
come to be lost, and such like things. Posterity shall reape singular profit by such
compositions; but I, what honor except by my good fortune? Many famous bookes are of
this condition. When I read Philip de Commines (now diverse years since), a right
excellent author, I noted this speech in him as a saying not vulgar: That a man should
carefully take heed how be do his master so great or much service, that he thereby be
hindred from finding his due recompence for it. I should have commended the invention,
but not him. After that I found it in Tacitus: Beneficia eo usque lata sunt dum videntur
exolvi posse, ubi multum antevenere pro gratia odium redditur: (CORN. TACIT. Annal.
iv.) ’Benefits are so long well-come, as we think they may be requited, but when they
much exceed all power of recompence, hate is returned for thankes and good will.’
Seneca very stoutly: Nam qui putat esse turpe non reddere, non vult esse cui reddat:
(SEN. Epist. lxxxi.) ’For he that thinkes it a shame not to requite, could wish he were not
whom he should requite.’ Q.Cicero with a looser byas: Qui se non putat satisfacere,
amicus esse nullo modo potest: ’He that thinkes he does not satisfie, can by no means be
a friend.’ The subject according as it is may make a man be judged learned, wise, and
memorious; but to judge in him the parts most his own and best worthy, together with the
force and beautie of his mind, ’tis very requisite we know first what is his own, and what
not; and in what is not his own, what we are beholding to him for, in consideration of his
choise, disposition, ornament, and language he has thereunto furnished. What if he have
borrowed the matter and empaired the form? as many times it commeth to pass. We
others that have little practise with bookes are troubled with this, that when we meet with
any rare or quaint invention in a new Poet, or forcible argument in a Preacher, we dare not
yet commend them until we have taken instruction of some wise man, whether that art be
their own or another bodies, And until then I ever stand upon my own guard. I come
lately from reading over (and that without any intermission) the story of Tacitus (a matter
not usual with me; it is now twenty years, I never spent one whole hour together upon a
book), and I have now done it at the instant request of a gentleman whom France holdeth
in high esteeme, as well for his own worth and valor as for a constant form of
sufficiencie and goodnes apparently seen in diverse brethren of his. I know no author that

in a public register entermixeth so many considerations of manners and particular
inclinations. And I deem cleane contrary to what he thinketh; who being especially to
follow the lives of the Emperours of his time, so diverse and extreme in all manner of
form, so many notable and great actions, which namely their cruelty produced in their
subjects, he had a more powerfull and attractive matter to discourse and relate, then if he
had been to speak or treat of battles and universall agitations. So that I often find him
barren, sleightlie running-over those glorious deaths, as if he feared to attediate and molest
us with their multitude and continuance. This form of historie is much more profitable:
Publike innovations depend more on the conduct of fortune; private on ours. It is rather a
judgement then a deduction of an history: therein are more precepts then narrations. It is
not a book to read, but a volume to study and to learne; it is so fraught with sentences,
that right or wrong they are hudled up. It is a seminary of morall and a magazine of
pollitique discourses, for the provision and ornament of those that possesse some place in
the managing of the world. He ever pleadeth with solid and forcible reasons, after a sharpe
and witty fashion; following the affected and laboured stile of his age. They so much
loved to raise and puffe themselves up, that where they found neither sharpnesse not
subiility in things, they would borrow it of wordes. He draweth somewhat neare to
Seneca’s writing. I deem Tacitus more sinnowy, Seneca more sharpe. His service is more
proper to a crazed troubled state, as is ours at this present; you would often say, he
portrayeth and toucheth us to the quick. Such as doubt of his faith do manyfestly
accuse themselves to hate him for somewhat else. His opinions be sound, and enclining to
the better side of the Roman affairs. I am nevertheless something greeved that he has
more bitterly judged of Pompey then honest men’s opinions, who lived and conversed with
him, do well allow of: to have esteemed him altogether equall to Marius and Silla, saving
that he was more close and secret. His intention and canvasing for the government of
affairs has not been exempted from ambition nor cleared from revenge; and his own
friends have feared that had he gotten the victory, it would have transported him beyond
the limits of reason, but not unto an unbridled and raging measure. There is nothing in his
life that has threatned us with so manifest a cruelty and express tyranny. Yet must not
the suspition be counterpoised to the evidence: So do not I believe him. That his
narrations are natural and right might happily be argued by this, that they do not alwaies
exactly apply themselves to the conclusions of his judgement, which he pursueth
according to the course he has taken, often beyond the matter he showeth us, which be
has dained to stoop unto with glance. He needeth no excuse to have approoved the
religion of his times according to the laws which commanded him, and been ignorant of
the true and perfect worship of God, That’s his ill fortune, not his defect. I have principally
considered his judgement, whereof I am not everywhere throughly resolved. As namely
these words contayned in the letter, which Tiberius, being sicke and aged, sent to the
Senate: ’What shall I write to you my masters, or how shall I write to you, or what shall I
not write to you in these times? May the gods and goddesses loose me worse then I dayly
feel myself to perish, if I can tell.’ I cannot perceive why he should so certainly apply
them onto a stinging remorse, tormenting the conscience of Tiberius; At least when my
self was in the same plight, I saw it not. That has likewise seemed somwhat demiss and

base unto me, that having said how he exercised a certain honorable magistracy in
Rome, he goeth about to excuse himself that it is not for ostentation he spake it. This one
tricke, namely in a mind of his quality, seems but base and course unto me; For not to
dare speak roundly of himself, accuses some want of courage. A constant, resolute, and
high judgement, and which judgeth soundly and surely, every hand while useth his own
examples, as well as of any strange thing, and witnesseth as freely of himself as of a third
person: a man must overgoe these populare reasons of civility in favor of truth and
liberty. I dare not only speak of my self, but speak alone of my self. I stragle when I
write of any other matter, and digresse from my subject. I do not so indiscreetly love my
self, and am so tied and commixt to my self as that I can not distinguish and consider
my self a part, as a neighbour, as a tree; it is an equall error either not to see how far a
mans worth stretcheth, or to say more of it then one seeth good cause. We owe more love
to God then to ourselves, and know him less, and yet we talk our fill of him. If his
writings relate any thing of his conditions, he was a notable man, upright and courageous,
not with a superstitious virtue, but Philosophicall and generous: He may be found over-
hardy in his testimonies. As where he holdeth that a souldier carrying a burden of wood,
his hands were so stifly benumbed with cold that they stucke to his wood, and remained
so fast unto it, that as dead flesh they were divided from his arms. In such cases I am
wont to yield unto the authority of so great testimonies. Where he also says that
Vespasian, by the favor of the God Serapis, healed in the citie of Alexandria a blinde
woman with the rubbing and anointing her eyes with fasting spettle, and some other
miracles, which I remember not well now, he does it by the example and devoire of all
good historians. They keep a register of important events; among public accidents are
allso popular reports and opinions. It is their part to relate common conceits, but not to
sway them. This part belongeth to Divines and Philosophers, directors of consciences.
Therefore, that companion of his, and as great a man as he, said most wisely: Equidem
plura transcribo quam credo: Nam nec affirmare sustineo de quibus dubito nec sub
ducere quæ accepi: ’I write out more then I believe: for neither can I bide to affirm what I
doubt of, nor to withdrawe what I have heard.’ And that other: Hæc neque affirmare
neque refellere operæ precium est: famæ rerum standum est: ’It is not worth the talk, or
to avouch, or to refute these things we must stand to report.’ And writing in an age
wherein the beliefe of prodigies began to decline, he says he would notwithstanding not
omit to insert in his Annals and give footing to a thing received and allowed of so many
honest men, and with so great reverence by antiquity. It is very well said: That they yielde
us the history, more according as they receave then according as they esteeme it. I, who
am king of the matter I treat of, and am not to give accompt of it to any creature living,
do nevertheless not altogether believe my self for it: I often hazard upon certain
outslips of my mind for which I distrust my self; and certain verball wilie-beguilies,
whereat I shake mine ears; but I let them run at hab or nab, I see some honor them
selves with such like things: ’Tis not for me alone to judge of them. I present my self
standing and lying before and behinde, on the right and left side, and in all by natural
motions. Spirits likewise in force are not ever likewise in application and taste. See here what
my memory does in grose, and yet very uncertainely present unto me of it. In breefe, all

judgments are weake, demiss and imperfect.



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER IX: OF VANITIE






CHAPTER IX: OF VANITIE
HERE IS perhaps no vanity more manyfest then so vainely to
write of it. What Divinity has so divinely expressed thereof unto us,
ought of all men of understanding to be diligently and continually
meditated upon. Who seeth not that I have entered so large a field, and
undertaken so high a pitch, wherein so long as there is either Inke or
Paper in the world, I may uncessantly wander and fly without
encombrance? I can keep no register of my life by my actions: fortune
placeth them to lowe: I hould them of my fantasies. Yet have I seen a gentleman who
never communicated his life but by the operations of his belly; you might have seen in
his house, set out for a show, a row of basins for seaven or eight dayes. It was all his
study, it was all his talk: All other discourses were unsavory to him. These are somewhat
more civile, the excrements of an ould spirit, sometimes hard, sometimes laxative; but
ever indigested. And when shall I come unto an end of representing a continuall agitation
or incessant alteration of my thoughts, what subject soever they happen; since Diomedes
filled six thousand bookes only with the subject of Grammar? What is idle babling like to

produce, since faltring and liberty of the tongue has stuft the world with so horrible a
multitude of volumes? So many words only for words. Oh Pythagoras, why didst not
you conjure this tempest? One Galba, of former ages, being accused for living idlie,
answered that ’all men ought to give an account of their actions, but not of their abiding.’
He was deceived; for justice has also knowledge and animadversion over such as gather
stubble (as the common saying is) or looke about for gape-seed. But there should be some
correction appointed by the laws against foolish and unprofitable writers, as there is
against vagabonds and loiterers; so should both my self and a hundred others of our
people be banished. It is no mockerie: Scribling seems to be a Symthome or passion of
an irregular and licentious age. When wrote we ever so much as we have done since our
intestine troubles, or when filled the Romans so many volumes as in the times of their
ruine? Besides that, the refining of wits in a common wealth does seldom make them the
wiser; this idle working proceedeth of this, that all men do over slowly give themselves
to the office of their function, and are easily withdrawne from it. The corruption of the
times we live in is wrought by the particular contribution of every one of us: some
conferre treason unto it, some injustice, other some irreligion, tyranny, avarice and
cruelty, according as they are more or less powerfull; the weaker sort, whereof I am one,
imparte foolishnesse, vanity and idlenesse unto it. It seems to be the season of vain
things when the domageable press us. In a time where to do evil is common, to do
nothing profitable is in a manner commendable. One thing comforts me, that I shall be of
the last that shall be attached; whilst they shall provide for the worser sort and the most
hurtful, I shall have leisure to amend my self; for me thinkes it would be against
reason busily to insist and pursue petty inconveniences, when great ones infect us. And
the Physition Philotimus, to one that offred his finger to dresse, by whose face, looke and
breath he apparently perceaved that he had an impostume in his loonges: ’My friend (quoth
he), it is now no fit time to busie your self about your nayles.’ Yet concerning this
purpose, I saw not many years since a friend of mine, whose name and memory (for
diverse respects) I hould in singular account, who in the midst of our troublous mischiefes,
when no more then at this time neither lawe, nor justice, nor magistrate was executed or
did his office, published certain silly reformations concerning the excess of aparell,
gluttony and dyet, and abuses committed among pettyfogging lawiers. They be
ammusings wherewith a people in a desperate taking is fed, that so men may say they are
not cleane forgotten. Even so do these others who mainely apply themselves to forbid
certain manners of speach, dances and vain sports, unto a people wholy given over to all
licenciousnesse and execrable vices. It is then no convenient time for a man to wash and
netifie himself when he is assailed by a violent fever. It only belongs to Spartans to
tricke, to combe and wash themselves at what time they are ready to cast themselves into
some extreme hazard of life. As for me, I am subject to this ill custom, that if but a
pump fit not handsomly upon my foot, I shall also neglect my shirt and my cloake; for I
disdaine to correct my self by halfes when I am in bad estate, I flesh my self on evil
and abandon my self through despaire, and run to downefall, and (as the saying is) cast
the haft after the hatchet. I grow obstinate in empairing; and esteeme my self no more
worthy of my care, either all well or all evil. It is a favor to me that the desolation of our

state does sutably meet with the desolation of my age: I rather endure that my evills
should thereby be surcharged then if my goods had thereby been troubled. The words I
utter against misfortune are words of spite. My courage, insteed of yielding, does grow
more obstinate; and contrary to others, I find my self more given to devotion in
prosperous then adverse fortune; according to Xenophons rule, if not according to his
reason. And I rather looke on heaven with a chearefull eye, to thanke it, then to begge any
thing. I am more careful to encrease my health when it smiles upon me, then to recover it
when I have lost it. Prosperities are to me as discipline and instruction, as adversities and
crosses are to others. As if good fortune were incompatible with a good conscience, men
never become honest but by adverse and crosse chances. Good fortune is to me a singular
motive unto moderation and forcible spurre unto modesty. Prayers winne me, menaces
reject me, favors relent me, fear imperverseth me. Amongst humane conditions this one
is very common, that we are rather pleased with strange things then with our own; we
love changes, affect alterations, and like innovations.
Ipsa dies ideo nos grato perluit haustu,
Quod permutatis hora recurrit equis.
Times therefore us refresh with welcome air,
Because their hours on chang’d horse do repayre.
And my share is therein. Such as follow the other extremity, only to be well pleased
with and in themselves, and self-conceitedly to over-esteeme what they possesse above
others, and acknowledge no form fayrer then that they see, if they be not more advised
then we, they are indeed more happy. I envie not their wisdom, but grudge their good
fortune. This greedy humor of new and unquenchable desire of unknown things dooth
much increase and nourish in me a desireto travell; but diverse other circumstances
conferre unto it. I am well pleased to neglect and shake of the government of my own
household. It is some pleasure to command, were it but a mole-hill, and a delight to be
obaied. But it is a pleasure over-uniform and languishing. Besides that it is ever
necessarily intermixed with troublous cares and hart-wearing thoughts. Sometimes the
indigence and oppression of your own people, sometimes the contentions and quarels of
your neighbors, and othertimes their insulting and usurpation over you, does vexe, does
trouble and afflict you:
Aut verberatæ grandine vineæ,
Fundusque mendax, arbore nunc aquas
Culpante nunc torrentia agros
Sydera, nunc hyemes iniquas. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. i. 29.
Or Vinevards beate and wet with haile and raine,
Or grounds defrauding hope, while trees complain,

Sometime of waters, sometime of those starres
That scorch the fields, sometime of winters wars.
And that God will hardly once in halfe a yeare send you a season that shall throughly
please your Bayly and content your Receaver; and that if it be good for your vines, it be
not hurtful for your meddowes.
Aut nimiis torret fervoribus ætherius Sol,
Aut subiti perimunt imbres, gelidæque pruinæ
Flabraque ventorum violento turbine vexent. -- Lucr. v. 215.
Or with excessive heate heavens Sunne does toast,
Or sodaine stormes do kill, and chilling frost, Or violent whirle-wind blasts
do vexe the coast.
As that new and well-shapen shoe of that man of former ages, which hurts and wrings
your foote and that a stranger knowes not what it costes you and what you contribute to
maintaine the show of that order which is seen in your housholde, and which
perhaps you purchase at too high a rate. It was very late before I betooke my self to
husbandrie. Those whom nature caused to be borne before me have long time ridde me
of that careful burden: I had already taken another habite more suitable to my
complexion. Nevertheless by that I have observed therein, I find it to be rather a
troublesome then a hard occupation. Whosoever is capable of any other thing may easily
discharge that. If I would seek to grow rich, that way would seem over-long and tedious
to me: I would then have served our kings, a trade more beneficiall then all others, since I
pretend but to get the reputation that as I have gotten nothing, so have I not wasted any
thing; suitable to the rest of my life; as unfit to affect any good, as improper to work any
evil of consequence; and that I only seek to weare out my life, I may (God be thanked)
do it without any great attention: if the worst come to pass, before poverty assaile you,
seek by prevention to cut of your charges, and by husbanding your expences keep
aforehand with it; that is it I trust unto, and hope to reforme my self before it come neare
or enforce me to it. As for other matters, I have forestalled many degrees and established
sundry ways in my mind, to live and rubbe out with less then I have. I say to live with
contentment. Non estimatione census, verum victu atque cultu, terminatur pecuniæ
modus: (Cic. Parad.) ’The measure of money is lymited not by the estimate of wealth or
place, but by the manner of living and other furniture.’ My very neede does not so
precisely possesse my whole estate, but that without touching to the quick or empairing
the main, fortune shall find something to play upon or take hold of. My very presence,
as ignorant and grim as it is, affordeth much helpe to my houshould affairs: I apply my
self thereunto but somewhat dispightfully, considering the manner of my house, which is,
that severally to burne my candle at one end, the other is thereby nothing spared.
Travelsdo not much hurt me, were it not for the charges, which are exceeding great and
beyond my ability, having ever been accustomed to journey not only with necessary, but

also decent equipage; and that’s the reason I make but short journeis and travel not to
often; wherein I employ but the scumme and what I can well spare, temporising and
differing according as it commeth more or less. I will not have the pleasure of my
wandring to corrupt the delight of my retiring. Contrary-wise, my intent is that they
nourish and favor one another. Fortune has steaded me in this, that since my chiefest
profession in this life was to live delicately and quietly, and rather negligently then
seriously, it has deprived me of need to hoard up riches to provide for the multitude of
my heirs. For one, if that be not sufficient for him, wherewith I have lived so plenteously,
at his own perill be it. His indiscretion shall not deserve that I wish him more. And every
man (according to the example of Phocion) provideth sufficiently for his children, that
provideth they be not unlike to him. I should by no means be of Crates his mind, or
commend his proceedings. He left his money with a banquier upon this condition, That if
his children were fooles be should deliver it them; but prooving wise and able to shift for
themselves, he should distribute the same amongst the greatest fooles. As if fooles, being
least capable to make a shift with out it, were more capable to use riches. So it is that the
hurt proceeding from my absence does not (in mine opinion) deserve, so long as I shall
have means to bear it, I should refuse to accept the occasions that offer themselves to
distract me from this toylesome assistance. There is ever some peece out of square.
Sometimes the business of one house, and other times the affairs of another, do hurry
you. You pry too neare into all things; herein, as well as elsewhere, your perspicuity does
harme you. I steale from such occasions as may move me to anger, and remoove from the
knowledge of things that thrive not; yet can I not so use the matter, but still I stumble
(being at home) upon some inconvenience which displeaseth me. And slight knaveries
that are most hidden from me are those I am best acquainted with. Some there are which
to avoyd a further mischief a man must helpe to conceal himself: vain prickings
(vain sometimes), but yet ever prickings. The least and sleightest hindrances are the
sharpest. And as the smallest letters hurt our eyes most, so the least affairs grieve us
most: A multitude of slender evils offendeth more then the violence of one alone, how
great soever. Even as ordinary thornes, being small and sharpe, pricke us more sharpely
and sans threatning, if on a sudden we bit upon them. I am no Philosopher: Evils oppresse
me according as they waigh, and waigh according to their form, as well as according to
the matter, and often more. I have more insight in them then the vulgar sort; and so have I
more patience. To conclude, if they hurt me not, they lie heavy upon me. Life is a tender
thing and easy to be distempered. Since I began to grow towards peevish age, and by
consequence toward frowardnes, nemo enim resistit ubi cum ceperit impelli: (SEN. Epist.
i. 13 f.) ’For no man stayes himself when he is set on going.’ What ever foolish cause has
brought me to it, I provoke the humor that way, which afterward by his own motion is
fostred and exasperated, attracting and heaping up one matter upon another, to feede it
self withall.
Stillicidii casus lapidem cavat.
By often falling on,

Even water breakes a stone.
These ordinary distilling drops consume and ulcerate me. Ordinary inconveniences are
never light. They are continuall and irreparable if they continually and inseperatly aryse
from the members of husbandry. When I consider my affairs a far off and in grosse, I
find, be it because I have no exact memory of them, that hitherto they have thrived
beyond my reasons and expectation. Me thinks I draw more from them then there is in
them: their good success betraieth me. But am I waded into the business? See I all these
parcels march?
Tum vero in curas animum deducimus omnes. -- Virg. Æn. v. 720.
Then we our mind divide,
To cares on every side.
A thousand things therein give me cause to desire and fear. Wholy to forsake them is
very easy unto me; without toyling, and vexation altogether to apply my self unto them
is most hard. It is a pittyfull thing to be in a place where whatsoever you see doeth set on a
work and concerne you; And me thinkes enjoy more blithly and taste more choisely the
pleasures of a stranger house then of my own, and both my mind and taste run more
freely and purely on them. Diogenes answered according to my humor, when being
demanded what kind of Wine he liked best, ’Another mans,’ said he. My father delighted
to build at Montaigne, where he was borne; and in al this policy of domestick affairs, I
love to make use of his examples and rules, unto which I will as much as possibly I can tie
my successors. Could I do better for him, I would performe it. I glory his will is at this
day practised by me, and does yet work in me. God forbid I should ever suffer any
image of life to perish under my hands, that I may yield unto so good and so kind a
father. If I have undertaken to finish any old peece of wall, or repare any building either
imperfect or decaied, it has certainly been because I had rather a respect to his intention
then a regard to my contentment. And I blame my negligence or lithernesse that I have not
continued to perfect the foundations he had laid, or beginnings he had left in his house; by
so much the more because I am in great likelihood to be the last possessor of it, namely of
my race, and set the last hand unto it. For concerning my particular Application, neither
the pleasure of building, which is said to be so bewitching, nor hunting, nor hawking, nor
gardens, nor such other delights of a retired life, can much embusie or greatly ammuse
me. It is a thing for which I hate my self, as of all other opinions that are incommodious
to me. I care not so much to have them vigorous and learned as I labor to have them
easy and commodious unto life. They are indeed sufficiently true and sound, if they be
profitable and pleasing. Those who hearing me relate my own insufficiencie in matters
pertaining to husbandry or thrift, are still whispering in mine ears that it is but a kind of
disdaine, and that I neglect to know the implements or tooles belonging to husbandry or
tillage, their seasons and orders; how my wines are made, how they graft, and understand
or know the names and formes of hearbes, of simples, of fruits, and what belongs to the

dressing of meats wherewith I live and whereon I feede; the names and prices of such
stuffes I cloath my selfewithall, only because I do more seriously take to heart some
higher knowledge; bring me in a manner to deaths doore. This is meere sottishnesse, and
rather brutishnesse then glory: I would rather be a cunning horseman then a good
Logician.
Quin tu aliquid saltem potius quorum indiget usus,
Viminibus Monique paras detexere junco? -- Virg. Buc. Ecl. ii. 71.
Why rather with soft wings make you not speed,
To work-up something whereof there is need?
We hinder our thoughts from the general and main point, and from the causes and
universall conducts, which are very well directed without us, and omit our own
business, and Michæl, who concernes us nearer then man. Now I most commonly stay at
home, but I would please my self better there then any where else.
Sit mea sedes utinam senectæ,
Sit modus lasso maris, et viarum,
. . . Militiæque. -- Hor. Car. ii. Od. vi. 6.
Some repair and rest to mine old age I crave
Journying, failing, with a weary warring,
O let an end have.
I wot not whether I shall come to an end of it. I would that in lieu of some other part of his
succession, my father had resigned that passionate love and dear affection which in his
aged yeeres he bare unto his houshold husbandry. He was very fortunate in conforming
his desires unto his fortune, and knew how to be pleased with what he had. Politike
Philosophy may how it list accuse the basenesse and blame the sterilitie of my occupation,
if, as he did, I may but once find the taste of it. I am of this opinion, that the honorablest
vocation is to serve the Commonwealth, and be profitable to many. Fructus enim ingenii
et virtutis, omnisque præstantiæ, tum maximus accipitur, quum in proximum quemque
confertur: (Cic. Amer.) ’For then is most fruit reaped, both of our wit and virtue and all
other excellencie, when it is bestowed upon our neighbors.’ As for me, I depart from it,
partly for conscience sake (for whence I discern the waight concerning such vacations, I
also discover the slender means I have to supply them withall; And Plato, a master
workeman in all politike government, omitted not to abstaine from them), partl y for
lithernesse. I am well pleased to enjoy the world without troubling or pressing my self
with it; to live a life only excusable, and which may neither be burthensome to me nor
to any other. Never did man go more plainly and carelesly to work in the care and
government of a third man, then I would, had I a ground to work upon. One of my wishes

at this instant should be to find a son in law that could handsomely allure and
discreetly beguile my old yeeres, and lull them asleepe; into whose hands I might despose
and in all soveraignity resigne the conduct and managing of my goods, that he might
dispose of them as I do, and gain upon them what I gain; alwaies provided he would
but carry a truely thankfull and friendly mind. But what? we live in a world where the
loyalty of our own children is not knowen. Whosoever has the charge of my purse when
I travell has it freely and without controll; as well might he deceive me in keeping of
reckonings. And if he be not a Divell, I bind him to deale well and honestly by my
carelesse confidence. Multifallere docuerunt, dum timent falli, et aliis jus peccandi
suspicando fecerunt: ’Many have taught others to deceive while themselves fear to be
deceived, and have given them just cause to offend by suspecting them unjustly.’ The most
ordinary assurance I take of my people is a kind of disacknowledge or neglect; I never
presume vices but after I have seen them; and trust more yoong men such as I imagine to
be the least debaushed and corrupted by ill examples. I had rather hear at two months end
that I have spent foure hundred crownes, then every night when I should go to my quiet
bed have mine ears tired and my mind vexed with three, five, or seven. Yet in this kind
of stealing have I had as little stolne from me as any other; True it is, I lend a helping
hand to ignorance. I wittingly entertaine a kind of troubled and uncertaine knowledge of
my money; until it come to a certain measure I am content to doubt of it. It is not amisse
if you allow your boy or servant some small scope for his disloyalty and indiscretion. If in
grosse we have sufficiently left to bring our matters to pass, this excess of fortunes-
liberalitie, let us somewhat more suffer it to stand to her mercy, It is the gleaners fee.
After all, I esteeme not so much my peoples fidelity as I disesteeme their injuries. Oh base
and absurd study, for a man to study his money, and please himself with handling and
counting the same; for that’s the way whereby covetousnesse maketh her approches. Since
eighteene yeeres that I have had the full disposing of my goods in my own hands, I could
never yet be brought to overlooke neither titles nor bookes, no not so much as the
principal affairs that should necessarily pass through my knowledge and care.
It is no Philosophicall contempt to neglect worldly and transitorie things: my taste is not
so exquisitely nice, for I value them according to their worth at least: but truly it is all
inexcusable slothfulnesse and childish negligence. What would I not rather do then read
a contract? And more willingly, as a slave to my businesses with carke to overlooke and
care to survay a company of old-dusty bookes, and plod upon musty writings? and which
is worse, other mens, as so many do daily for money? I have nothing so dear as care and
pain; and I only endeavour to become carelesse and retchlesse. I had, in mine opinion,
been fitter (if it might be) to live by others fortune, without bounden duty or bondage. And
yet I wot not (the matter being thorowly sifted) whether, according to my humor and
fortune, what I must endure with my affairs, and pocket up at my servants and familiars
hands, has not more abjection, importunitie and sharpenesse, then the following of
another man should have better borne then my self, and who should [guide] me
somewhat at mine ease. Servitus obedientia est fracti animi et abjecti, arbitrio carentis
suo: (Cic. Parad. v.) ’Service is an obedience of an abject, broken heart, that cannot
dispose of itself.’ Crates did worse who voluntarily cast himself into liberties of

povertie, only to ridd himself of the inconveniences, indignities and cares of his house;
which I would not do. I hate povertie as much as grief; yet could I find in my heart to
change this manner of life with another less glorious and not so troublesome. Being
absent, I discharge my self of all such careful thoughts, and should less feel the
ruinous down-fall of a Town, then, being present, the fall of a Tile: Alone my mind is
easily freed, but in company it indureth as much as a Plough-mans. My horse uncurb’d, his
reines misplaced, or a stirrup or a strap hitting against my legge, will keep me in a checke
a whole day long. I rouze my courage sufficiently against inconvenience; mine eyes I
cannot,
Sensus o superi sensus!
At home I am ever answerable for whatsoever is amisse. Few masters (I speak of meane
condition, as mine is; whereof if any be, they are the more happy) can so fully rely upon a
second, but still a good part of the burden shall lie upon them. That does perhaps take
something from my fashion, in entertaining of guests or new commers; and happily I have
been able to stay some, more by my kitchin then by my behaviour or grace, as do the
peevish and fantastic; and I greatly diminish the pleasure I should take in my house by
the visitations and meetings of my friends. No countenance is so foolish or so ill
beseeming a gentleman in his own house, as to see him vexed or troubled about his
houshold or domesticke affairs; to see him whisper one of his servants in the eare, and
threaten another with his looke. It should insensibly glide on, and represent an ordinary
course. And I utterly dislike that a man should entertains his guest with either excusing or
boasting of the entertainment he affoordeth them. I love order and cleanlinesse -
------ et cantharus et lanx,
Ostendunt mihi me. -- Hor. i. Ep. v. 23.
My dish, my drinking kanne,
Shew me what kind of man
- well nigh as much as plentie: In my own house I exactly looke unto necessities, little
unto state, and less unto ornament. If your neighbors servant be fighting with his
companion, if a dish be overthrowen, you but laugh at it, you sleepe quietly whilst Sir
such a one is busie casting up of accounts, and over-seeing his stocke with his steward,
and all about your provision for tomorrow. I speak according to mine opinion, omitting
not in general to think how pleasing an ammusement it is to certain natures to see a
quiet and prosperous houshold directed by a formall and guided by a regular order. But
not intending to fasten my own errours and inconveniences to the matter: Nor to
gainesay Plato, who deemeth that the happiest occupation any man can follow, is, to apply
himself to his own private business without injustice. When I journey, I have nothing
to care for but my self, and how my money is laid out, which is disposed with one only

precept. Over-many parts are required in hoarding and gathering of goods: I have no skill
in it. In spending I have some knowledge, and how to give my expences [play]: which
indeed is its principal use. But I attend it over ambitiously, which makes it both unequall
and deformed; and besides that immoderate in one and other usage. If it appeare and make
a good show, if it serve the turn, I indiscreetly go after it; and as indiscreetly restraine
my self, if it shine or smile not upon me. Whatsoever it be, either Art or nature, that
imprints this condition of life into us, by relation to others, it does us much more hurt then
good. In going about to frame apparances according to the common opinion, we defraud
ourselves of our own profits. We care not so much what our state or how our being is in
us, and in effect, as we do how and what it is, in the public knowledge of others. Even
the goods of the mind, and wisdom itself, seem fruitlesse unto us, if only enjoyed
by us; except it be set forth to the open view and approbation of strangers. There are some
whose gold runnes by streames in places under ground, and that imperceptible; others
extend the same in plates and leaves. So that to some pence are worth crownes, to others
the contrary; the world judging the employment and value according to the outward show.
All over-nice care and curious heed about riches has a touch or a taste of avarice. Even
their dispending and over regular and artificiall liberalities are not worth a warie heed
taking, and countervaile not a painefull diligence. Who so will make his expence even and
just, makes it strict and forced; either close-keeping or employing of money are in
themselves things indifferent, and admit no colour of good or evil but according to the
application of our will. The other cause that draws me to these Journeyes or Vagaries is
the dissent or disparitie in the present manners of our state. I could easily comfort my self
with this corruption in regard of the public interest; -- Juven. Sat. xiii. 28.
Times worse then times of Iron, for whose bad frame
And wickednesse even nature findes no name,
Nor has from any metall set the same.
But not for my own: I am in particular over-pressed by it. For round about where I
dwell we are, by the over-long licentiousnesse of our intestine civill wars, almost
growen old, in so licentious and riotous a form of state,
Quippe ubi fas versum atque nefas. -- Virg. Georg. i. 505.
As where of good and bad,
There is no difference had.
That in good truth it were a wonder if it should continue and maintaine itself.
Armati terram exercent, semperque recentes
Convectare juvat prædas, et vivere rapto. -- Virg. Æn. ix. 612.

They armed plow the land, and joy to drive,
And draw new booties, and on rapine live.
To conclude, I see by our example that the societie of men does hold and is sewed
together, at what rate soever it be; where ever they be placed, in mooving and closing,
they are ranged and stowed together, as uneven and rugged bodies, that orderlesse are
hudled in some close place, of themselves find the way to be united and joined together
one with another; and many times better then Art could have disposed them. King Philip
assembled a rabble of the most leaud, reprobate and incorrigible men be could find out,
all whch he placed in a City which of purpose he had caused to be built for them, of
whom it bare the name. I imagine that even of their vices they erected a politike
contexture amongst themselves, and a commodious and just societie. I see not one action,
or three, or a hundred, but even diverse manners, admitted and commonly used; so
extravagant (namely, in disloyalty) and so barbarous in inhumanities which in my conceit
are the worst and most execrable kind of vices, that I have not the heart so much as to
conceive them without horrour: All which I in a manner admire as much as I detest. The
exercise of these egregious villanies beareth a brand of vigor and hardinesse of mind as
much as of error and irregular confusion. Necessitie composeth and assembleth men
together. This casual combining is afterward framed into laws. For there have been
some as barbarously-savage as humane opinion could possibly produce, which
notwithstanding have kept their bodies in as good health and state, in long life, as those of
Plato or Aristotle could do. And to say true, all these descriptions of policy, feigned by
Art and supposition, are found ridiculous and foolish to be put in practise. These great
and long continuing altercations about the best form of societie and most commodious
rules to unite us together, are altercations only proper for the exercise of our wit: As in
arts diverse subjects are found that have no essence but in agitation and disputing, without
which they have no life at all. Such an Idea of policy, or picture of government, were to
be established in a new world; but we take a world already made and formed to certain
customs; we engender not the same as Pyrrha, nor beget it as Cadmus. By what means
soever we have the privilege to re-erect and range the same anew, we can very hardly
wrest it from the accustomed habit and fold it has taken, except we breake all. Solon
being demanded whether he had established the best laws he could for the Athenians:
answered, indeed of those they would have received: with such a shift does Varro excuse
himself, saying, that if he were newly to beginne to write of religion, he would plainly
tell what his beleefe were of it: But being alreadie received, he will speak more of it
according to custom then to nature. Not to speak by opinion, but consonant to truth, the
most excellent and best policy for any nation to observe, is that under which it has
maintained itself. Its form and essentiall commoditie does much depend of custom.
We are easily displeased with the present condition; yet do I hold that to wish the
government of few in a popular estate, or in a Monarchie another kind of policy, it is a
manifest vice and meere folly.
Ayme l’estat tel que tu le vois estre,

S’il est royall, ayme la royaute,
S’il est de peu, ou bien Communaute,
Ayme l’aussi, car Dieu a faict naistre. -- Pibrac.
Love you the state as you seest it to be:
If it be Regall, love the royall race,
If of a few or Common-weale, embrace
It as it is, borne there God pointed you.
So was the good Lord of Pibrac wont to speak of it, whom we have lately lost, a man of
so quaint and rare wit, of so sound judgement, and of so mild and affable behaviour. The
untimely loss of whom, with that of the Lord of Foix, both fatally happning to us at one
time, are surely losses of great consequence unto our crowne. I wot not well, whether
France, amongst all the men it has left, is able to affoord us two such other Gentlemen as
may, either in sincerity and woorth, or in sufficiencie and judgement for the counsell of
our Kings match these two Gascoynes. They were two mindes diversly fair, and verily, if
we respect the corrupted age wherein we live, both rare and gloriously-shining, every one
in her form. But alas! what destiny had placed them on the Theater of his age, so
dissonant and different in proportion from our deplorable corruption, and so far from
agreeing with our tumultuous stormes? Nothing does so neerely touch and so much
overlay an estate as innovation: Only change does give form to injustice and scope to
tyranny. If some one peece be out of square, it may be underpropt: one may oppose
himself against that which the alteration incident and corruption natural to all things
does not too much elonge and draw us from our beginnings and grounded principles. But
to undertake to re-erect and found again so huge a masse, and change or remoove the
foundations of so vast a frame, belongeth only to them who, instead of purging deface,
and in liew of cleansing scrape out; that will amend particular faults by an universall
confusion and cure diseases by death: Non tam commutandarum quam evertendarum
rerum cupidi: ’Not so desirous to have things altered as overthrowen.’ The world is fondly
unapt to cure itself: So impatient with that which vexeth or grieveth it, that it only
aimeth to ridd itself of it, never regarding at what rate. We see by a thousand examples
that it does ordinarily cure itself at its own charges: To be freed from a present evil is
no perfect cure, except there be a general amendment of condition. The end of a skilfull
Chirurgion is not to mortifie the bad flesh, it is but the beginning and addressing of his
cure: he aimeth further, that is, to make the natural to grow again, and reduce the partie
to his due being and quality. Who ever proposeth only to remoove what gnaweth him
shall be to seek: for good doeth not necessarily succeed evil: another, indeed a worse evil
may succeed it. As it hapned unto Cesars murderers, who brought the commonwealth to
so distresfull a plunge that they repented themselves they ever medled with the same. The
like has since fortuned to diverse, indeed in our days. The French that live in my times know
very well what to speak of such matters. All violent changes and great alterations,
disorder, distemper and shake a state very much. He that should rightly respect a sound
recovery or absolute cure, and before all other things thorowly consult about it, might
happily grow slacke in the business, and beware how he set his hand unto it. Pacuvius

Calavius corrected the vice of this manner of proceeding by a notable example. His fellow
Citizens had mutinied against their magistrates; He being a man of eminent authority in
the cittie of Capua, found one day the means to shut up the Senate in the Guildhall or
Palace; then calling the people together in the market place, told them that the day was
now come wherein with full and unresisted liberty they might take vengeance of the
tyrants that had so long and so many ways oppressed them, all which he had now at his
mercy, and unarmed. His opinion was, that orderly by lots they should be drawne out one
after another; which done they might particularly dispose of every one, and whatsoever
should be decreed of them, shold immediately be executed upon the place; provided they
should therewithall presently advise and resolve to nominate and establish some honest
and undetected man to supply the roome of the condemned, lest their cittie should remaine
void of due officers. To which they granted, and heard no sooner the name of a Senatour
read, but a loud exclamation of a general discontent was raised against him; which
Pacuvius perceiving, he requested silence, and thus bespake them. ’My countrymen, I see
very well that man must be cut off, he is a pernicious and wicked member but let us have
another sound good man in his place and whom would you name for that purpose?’ This
unexpected speech bred a distracted silence, each one finding himself to seek and much
confounded in the choise. Yet one, who was the boldest impudent amongst them,
nominated one whom he thought fittest; who was no sooner heard but a general consent
of voices, louder than the first, followed, all refusing him, as one taxed with a hundred
imperfections, lawfull causes, and just objections, utterly to reject him. These
contradicting humors growing more violent and hot, every one following his private
grudge or affection, there ensued a far greater confusion and hurly-burly in drawing of
the second and third Senatour, and in naming and choosing their successours, about which
they could never agree. As much disorder and more confusion about the election, as
mutual consent and agreement about the demission and displacing. About which
tumultuous trouble when they had long and to no end laboured and wearied themselves,
they began some here, some there, to scatter and steale away from the assemblies every
one with this resolution in his mind, that the oldest and best knowen evil is ever more
tolerable then a fresh and unexperienced mischiefs. By seeing ourselves piteously tossed
in continuall agitation: for what have we not done?
Eheu cicatricum et sceleris pudet,
Fratrumque: quid nos dura refugimus
Ætas? quid intactum nefasti
Liquimus? unde manus juventus
Metu Deorum continuit? quibus
Pepercit aris? -- Hor. Car. i. Od. xcv. 33.
Alas for shame of wickenuesse, and scarres,
Of brother-country-men in civill wars.
We of this hardned world, what do we shunne?
What have we execrable left undone?

To set their hand whereto has youth not dared
For fear of Gods? what altars has it spared?
I am not very sudden in resolving or concluding.
----ipsa si velit salus,
Servare prorsus non potest hanc familiam: -- Ter. Adel. act. iv. sc. 7.
This familie if safetie would
Keepe safe, I do not think it could.
Yet are we not perhaps come unto our last period. The preservation of states is a
thing in all likelihood exceeding our understanding. A civill policy (as Plato says) is a
mighty and puisant matter, and of very hard and difficult dissolution; it often endureth
against mortal and intestine diseases, indeed, against the injury of unjust laws, against
tyrannie, against the ignorance and debordement of Magistrates, and against the
licentiousnesse and sedition of the people. In all our fortunes we compare ourselves to
that which is above us, and looke toward those that are better. Let us measure ourselves
by that which is beneath us; there is no creature so miserably wretched but findes a
thousand examples to comfort himself withall. It is our fault that we more unwillingly
behold what is above us then willingly what is beneath us. And Solon said, that should a
man heape up in one masse all evils together, there is none that would not rather chuse to
carry back with him such evils as he alreadie has, then come to a lawfull division with
other men of that chaos of evils, and take his allotted share of them. Our Common-wealth
is much crazed and out of tune. Yet have diverse others been more dangyerously sicke,
and have not died. The gods play at hand-ball with us, and tosse us up and down on all
hands. Enim vero dii nos homines quasi pitas habent: (Plaut. Capt. Prol.) ’The gods
perdie do reckon and racket us men as their tennis-balles.’ The destinies have fatally
ordained the State of Rome for an exemplar patterne of what they can do in this kind. It
containeth in itself all formes and fortunes that concerne a state, whatsoever order,
trouble, good or bad fortune may in any sort effect in it. What man may justly despaire of
his condition, seeing the agitation, troubles, alterations, turmoiles, and motions wherewith
it was tossed to and fro, and which it endured? If the extention of rule and far-spreading
domination be the perfect health of a state, of which opinion I am not in any wise (and
Isocrates does greatly please me, who instructeth Nicocles not to envie those Princes who
have large dominations, but such as can well maintaine and orderly preserve those that
have been hereditarily escheated unto them) that of Rome was never so sound as when it
was most sicke and distempered. The worst of its form was to it the most fortunate. A
man can hardly distinguish or know the image of any policy under the first Emperors; it
was the most horrible and turbulent confusion that could be conceaved, which
notwithstanding it endured and therein continued, preserving, not a Monarchie bounded in
her limits, but so many nations, so different, so distant, so evil affected, so confusedly
commanded, and so unjustly conquered.

-----nec gentibus ullis
Commodat in populum terræ pelagique potentem,
Invidiam fortuna suam. -- Lucr. i. 82.
Fortune does to no other nation lend
Envie, against that people force to bend,
Which both by land and sea their force extend.
All that shaketh does not fall: The contexture of so vast a frame holds by more then one
naile. It holds by its antiquity, as olde buildings which age has robbed of foundation,
without loame or morter, and nevertheless live and subsist by their own waight.
------ nec jam validis radicibus hærens
Pondere tuta suo est. -- Ibid. 138.
Though now to no strong roote it sticke so fast
Yet is it safe by self-waight, and will last.
Moreover, he goes not cunningly to work, that only survayes the flankes and dykes; to
judge well of the strength of a place, he must heedily marke how and view which way it
may be approached, and in what state the assailant stand. Few vessels sinke with their
own waight, and without some extraordinary violence. Cast we our eyes about us and in
a general survay consider all the world; all is tottring, all is out of frame. Take a perfect
view of all great states by in Christendome and where ever else we have knowledge of,
and in all places you shall find a most evident threating of change and ruine:
Et sua sunt illis incommoda, pargue per omnes
Tempestas.
Their discommodities they know:
One storme likewise oer all does grow.
Astrologers may sport themselves with warning us, as they do, of imminent alterations
and succeeding revolutions; their divinations are present and palpable; we need not prie
into the heavens to find them out. We are not only to draw comfort from this universall
aggregation of evil and threats, but also some hope for the continuance of our state;
forasmuch as naturally nothing falleth where all things fall; a general disease is a
particular health: Conformitie is a quality enemy to dissolution. As for me, I nothing
despaire of it, and me thinks I already perceive some starting holes to save us by:
Deus hæc fortasse benigna

Reducet in sedem vice. -- Hor. Epod. xiii. 10.
It may be, God with gracious entercourse
Will reestablish these things in their course.
Who knowes whether God has determined it shall happen of them as of bodies that are
purged, and by long grievous sicknesses brought to a beter and sounder state; which
thorowly purged diseases do afterward yield them a more entire and purely-perfect health
then that they took from them? That which grieveth me most is, that, counting the
symptomes or affects of our evil, I see as many meerely proceeding of nature, and such as
the heavens send us, and which may properly be termed theirs, as of those that our own
surfet, or excess, or misse-diet, or humane indiscretion confer upon us. The very Planets
seem orderly to declareunto us that we have continued long enough, indeed beyond our
ordinary limits. This also grieves me, that the neerest evil threatning us is not a distemper
or alteration in the whole and solid masse, but a dissipation and divulsion of it - the
extreamest of our feares. And even in these fantastic humors or dotings of mine, I fear
the treason of my memory, least unmanly it have made me to register somethings twise. I
hate to correct and agnize my self, and can never endure but grudgingly to review and
repolish what once has escaped my pen. I here set down nothing that is new or lately
found out. They are vulgar imaginations, and which perhaps having been conceived
a hundred times, I fear to have already enrolled them. Repetition is ever tedious, were it
in Homer: But irkesome in things that have but one superficiall and transitorie show. I am
nothing pleased with inculcation or wresting-in of matters, be it in profitable things, as in
Seneca. And the manner of his Stoike schoole displeaseth me, which is, about every matter,
to repeat at large, and from the beginning to the end such principles and presuppositions
as serve in general: and every hand-while to re-allege anew the common arguments and
universall reasons. My memory does daily grow worse and worse, and is of late much
empaired:
Pocula lethæos ut si ducentia somnos,
. . . Arente fauce traxerim.-- Hor. Epod. xiv. 3.
As though with drie lips I had drunke that up,
Which draws oblivious sleepe in drowsie cup.
I shall henceforward be faine (for hitherto, thankes be to God, no capital fault has
hapned), whereas others seek time and occasion to premeditate what they have to say,
that I avoid to prepare my self, for fear I should tie my self to some strict bond, on
which I must depend. To be bound and tied does somewhat distract me: namely, when I
am wholly to rely and depend on so weake an instrument as is in my memory. I never read
this story, but I feel a certain proper and natural offence. Lyncestes being accused of a
conspiracie against Alexander, the very same day that, according to custom, he was led

forth in presence of all the army to be heard in his own defense, had in his mind a
premeditated oration, which he had studiously learnt by rote, whereof, stammering and
faltring, having uttered some words: And wrestling with his memory, and striving to run-it
over again, he was sodainly charged by the soldiers that were about him, and slain with
pikes, as they who held him to be convicted. His amazement and silence served them as a
confession; for they supposed that having had so long leisure in prison to prepare
himself, it was not (as they thought) his memory failed him, but his guilty conscience
bridled so his tongue and deprived him of his wonted faculties. It was truly well spoken.
The very place, the company and expectation astonishes a man when he most aimeth at an
ambition of well-speaking. What can a man do when a meere oration shall bring his life
into consequence? As for me, if I be tide unto a prescript kind of speaking, what bindes
me to it dooth also loose me from it, when I have committed and wholly assigned my self
unto my memory, I so strongly depend on the same that I overwhelme it: she faints under
her own burden. So much as I refer my self unto her, so much am I divided from self,
until I make tryall of in countenance. And I have some times been in pain in concealing
the bondage whereunto I was engaged: whereas my dessigne, in speaking, to represent a
main carelesnesse of accent and countenance, suddaine and unpremeditated, or casual
motions as rising of present occasions; rather loving to say nothing of any worth, then
make show I came provided to speak well: a thing above all unseemely to men of my
profession, and of over strict an obligation to one that cannot hold much. Preparation
gives more to hope then it brings with it.A man does often strip himself into his doblet, to
leape shorter then he did in his gowne. Nihil est his, qui placere volunt, tam adversauum,
quam expectatio: ’There is none so great an enemy to them that would please as
expectation.’ It is written of Curio the Orator, that when he proposed the distribution of the
parts of his oration into three or foure, or the number of his arguments and reasons, it was
his ordinary custom either to forget some one, or adde one or two more unto it. I have
ever shunned to fall into such an inconvenience, as one hating these self-promises and
prescriptions: Not only for the distrust of my memory, but also because this form draws
over neare unto an artiste. Simpliciora militates decent: ’Plaine wordes and manners
become Martialists.’ Sufficeth, I have now made a vow unto my self, no more to
undertake the charge to speak in any place of respect: For to speak in reading what one
has written, besides that it is most foolish and absurde, it is a matter of great disadvantage
to such as by nature were interressed or might do any thing in the action. And wholy to
rely or cast my self to the mercy of my present invention, much less: I have it by nature
so dulle and troubled, that it cannot in any wise supply me in sudaine and stead me in
important necessities. May it please the gentle reader to suffer this one part of Essay to run
on, and this third strain or addition of the rest of my pictures peeces. I adde, but I correct
not; First, because he who has hypothekised or engaged his labor to the world, I find
apparance that he has no longer right in the same; let him, if he be able, speak better els
where, and not corrupt the work he has already made sale off; Of such people a man
should buy nothing but after they are dead: let them throughly think on it before they
produce the same. Who hastens them? My book is alwaies one, except that according as
the Printer goes about to renew it, that the buyers depart not altogether empty-handed, I

give my self law to adde thereto (as it is but uncoherent checky, or ill joined in laid
work) some supernumerall embleme. They are but over-waights, which disgrace not the
first form, but give some particular price unto every one of the succeeding, by an
ambitious pety subtility. Whence, notwithstanding, it may easily happen that some
transposition of chronology is thereto commixt: my reports taking place according to their
opportunity, and not ever according to their age. Secondly, forasmuch as in regard of my
self I fear to loose by the exchange: My understanding does not alwaies go forward, it
sometimes goes also backeward: I in a manner distrust my own fantasies as much,
though second or third, as I do when they are the first, or present as past. We many times
correct ourselves as foolishly as we taxe others unadvisedly. I am grown aged by a
number of years since my first publications, which were in a thousand five hundred and
foure score. But I doubt whether I be encreased one inch in wisdom. My self now and
my self anon are indeede two; but when better, in good sooth I cannot tell. It were a
goodly thing to be old if we did only march towards amendment. It is the motion of a
drunkard, stumbling, reeling, giddie-brain’d, formeles, or of reedes, which the air dooth
casually wave to and fro what way it bloweth. Antiochus, in his youth, had stoutly and
vehemently wrote ten in favor of the Academy, but being olde be changed copy, and wrote as
violently against it: which of the two I should follow, should I not ever follow Antiochus?
Having once established a doubt, to attempt to confirme the certainty of humane opinions,
were it not an establishing of a doubt, and not of the certainty? and promise that had he
had another age given him, with assurance to live, he should ever have been in termes of
new agitations , not so much better as other and different? Publike favor has given me
some more boldnes then I hoped for; but the thing I fear most is to breed a glutting
saciety: I would rather spur then be weary, as a wiseman of my time has done.
Commendation is ever pleasing, from whom, from whence, or where-fore soever it come;
yet ought a man to be informed of the cause, if he will justly please and applaud himself
therewith. Imperfections themselves have their means to be recommended. Vulgar and
common estimation is little happy if it come to encounter: And I am deceived, if in my
dayes the worst composition,; and absurdest bookes have not gained the credit of popular
breath. Verily I am much beholding to diverse honest men, and I thanke them that
vouchsafe to take my endeavors in good parte. There is no place where the defects of the
fashion do so much appeare, as in a matter that in itself has nothing to recommend it.
Good reader, blame not me, for those that pass here, either by the fantazie or unwarinesse
of others; for every hand, each workeman brings his own unto them. I neither meddle
with orthography (and would only have them follow the ancient) nor with curious
painting: I have small experience in either. Where they altogether breake the sence, I little
trouble my self therewith; for at least they discharge me. But where they will wrest-in
and substitute a false sence (as often they do) and wyre-draw me to their conceits, then
they spoyle me. Nevertheless, when the sentence is not strong or sinnowy according to
my meaning, an honest man may reject it to be mine. He that shall know how little
laborious I am and how framed after my own fashion, will easily believe I would
rather endite anew as many more other Essayes, then subject my self to trace these over
again, for this childish correction. I was saving, erewhile that being plunged in the

deepest mine of this new kind of mettall, I am not only deprived of great familiarity
with men of different custom from mine, and other opinions, by which they holde
together by a knot, commanding all other knots; but am not also without some hazard,
amongst those with whom all things are equally lawfull, most of which cannot now adayes
empaire their market towarde our justice, whence the extreme degree of licenciousnesse
proceedeth. Casting over all the particular circumstances that concerne me, I find no one
man of ours to whome the inhibition of our laws costeth any thing, either in gain
ceasing, or in loss appearing (as Lawyers say), more then onto my self. And some there
be that in chollericke heate and humorous fury will cracke and vaunt much, that will
performe a great deale less then my self, if once we come to an equall balance. As a
house at all times freely open, much frequented, of great haunt and officious in
entertaining all sorts of people (for I could never be induced to make an implement of
war thereof; which I perceive much more willingly to be sought-out and flocked unto
where it is furthest from my neighbors) my house has merited much popular affection:
And it were a hard matter to gourmandize my self upon my own dung-hill: And I
repute it a wonderful and exemplar strangenesse, that having undergone so many stormy-
wrackes, so diverse changes and tumultuous-neighbour agitations, it does yet this day
continue free, and (as I may say) an undefiled virgin from shedding of blood, spoile, or
sacking. For, to say true, it was possible for a man of my disposition to escape from a
constant and continuall form, whatsoever it was. But the contrary invasions, hostile
incursions, alterations and vicissitudes of fortune round about me, have hitherto more
exasperated then mollified the humor of the country, and recharge me with dangers and
invincible difficulties. I have escaped. But it grieveth me that it is rather by fortune, indeed
and by my discretion, then by justice: And it vexeth me to be without the protection of
the laws and under any other safegard then theirs. As things now stand I live more then
halfe by the favor of others, which is a severe obligation. I would not be endebted for my
safety neither to the goodnesse nor to the good will of our great men, which applaude
themselves with my liberty and legalitie; nor to the facilitie of my predecessours or mine
own manners: for what if I were other then I am? If my demeanour, the liberty of my
conversation, or happilie alliance, binde my neighbors; It is a cruelty that they should
acquit themselves of it in suffering me to live, and that they may say, we give him a free
and undisturbed continuation of divine service in the chaple of his house, whilst all other
Churches round about are by us prophaned and deserted; and we freely allow and pardon
him the fruition of his goods and use of his life, as he maintaineth our wives, and in time
of need keepeth our cattle. It is long sin ce that in my house we have a share in Lycurgus
the Athenians praise, who was the general storier, depositary and guardian of his fellow-
citizens goods and purses. I am now of opinion that a man must live by law and
authorities and not by recompence or grace. How many gallant men have rather made
choise to lose their life then be indebted for the same? I shunne to submit my self to any
manner of obligation. But above all to which bindes me by duty of bonds of honor. I
find nothing so dear as what is given me, and that because my will remaines engaged
by a title of ingratitude: And I more willingly receive such offices as are to be sold: A
thing easy to be beleeved, for these I give nothing but money, but for those I give my

self. The bond that holdes me by the law of honestie seems to me much more urgent
and forcible then that of civill compulsion. I am more gently tyed by a Notarie then by my
self. Is it not reason that my conscience be much more engaged to that wherein she has
simply and only been trusted? Els my faith oweth nothing, for she has nothing lent her.
Let one helpe himself with the confidence or assurance he has taken from me. I would
much rather breake the prison of a wall or of the laws, then the bond of my word. I am
nicely scrupulous in keeping of my promises, nay almost superstitious, and in all subjects
I commonly pass them uncertaine and conditionall. To such as are of no weighty
consequence I adde force with the jealousie of my rule: she rackes and chargeth me with
her own interest. Yea, in such enterprises as are altogether my own and free, if I
speak the word or name the point, me thinkes I prescribe the same unto me; and that to
give it to anothers knowledge, it is to preordaine it unto himself. Me seems I absolutely
promise when I speak. Thus I make but small bragge of my propositions. The
condemnation I make of my self is more mooving, forcible and severe, then that of the
judges, who only take me by the countenance of common obligation; the constraint of
my conscience is more rigorous and more strictly severe; I faintly follow those duties to
which I should be hauled if I did not go to them. Hoc ipsum ita justum est quod recte fit,
si voluntarium: (Cic. Off. i.) ’This is so just, as it is well done, if it be voluntary.’ If the
action have no glimps of liberty, it has neither grace nor honor.
Quid mejus cogit, vix voluntate impetrent. -- Ter. Ad. act. iii. sc. 4.
What law enforceth me to do,
By will they can scarce winne me to.
Where necessitie draws me, I love to relent my will. Qua quicquid imperio cogitur,
exigenti magis, quam præstanti acceptum refertur. ’For whatsoever is enforced by
command is more imputed to him that exacteth then in him that performeth.’ I know some
that follow this aire even unto injustice. They will rather give then restore; sooner lend
then pay; and more sparingly do good to him to whom they are bound to do it. I bend
not that way, but am mainely against it. I love so much to disoblige and discharge my
self, that I have sometimes esteemed as profit the ingratitudes, the offences, and
indignities I had received of those to whom, either by nature or accidents, I was by way of
friendship somewhat beholding; taking the occasion of their fault for a quittance and
discharge of my debt. Although I continue to pay them the apparent offices with common
reason, I notwithstanding find some sparing in doing that by justice which I did by
affection; and somewhat to ease my self with the attention and diligence of my inward
will. Est prudentis sustinere ut cursum, sic impetum benevolentiæ: (Cic. De Amic.)’It is a
wisemans part to keep a hand as on the course, so on the career of his goodwill.’ Which
where ever I apply my self, is in me too urgent and over pressing, at least for a man that
by no means would be enthronged. Which husbandrie stands me in stead of some
comfort, about the imperfections of those that touch me. Indeed I am much displeased
they should thereby be of less worth; but so it is that I also save something of my

engagement and application towards them. I allow of him that loves his child so much
the less by how much more he is either deformedly crooked or scald-headed. And not
only when he is knavish or shrewd, but also being unlucky or ill borne (for God himself
has in that abated of his worth and natural estimation) alwaies provided, that in such a
cold and sleight affection he bear himself with moderation and exact justice. In me
proximitie of blood does nothing diminish, but rather aggravate defects. After all,
according to the skill I have in the knowledge of benefits and thankfulnesse, which is a
knowledge very subtill and of great use, I see no man more free and less indebted then
hitherto I am my self. What ever I owe, the same I owe simply to common and natural
obligations. There is no man more absolutely quit and clear else whence.
----nec sunt mihi nota potentum
Munera.
With gifts I am not much acquainted,
Of mighty men, and much less tainted.
Princes give me sufficiently if they take nothing from me, and do me much good if they
do me no hurt; it is all I require of them. Oh how much am I beholding to God,
forasmuch as it has pleased him that whatsoever I enjoy I have immediately received the
same from his grace; that he has particularly reserved all my debt unto himself. I most
instantly beseech his sacred mercy that I may never owe any man so much as one
essentiall God amercie. Oh thrise fortunate liberty, that has brought me so farr. May it
end successefully. I endeavour to have no manner of need of any man. In me omnis spes
egt mihi: ’All my hope for all my helpes is my self.’ It is a thing that every man may effect
in himself; but they more easily whom God has protected and sheltred from natural and
urgent necessities. Indeed it is both lamentable and dangerous to depend of others. Our
selves, which is the safest and most lawfull refuge, are not very sure under ourselves. I
have nothing that is my own but my self; yet is the possession thereof partly defective
and borrowed. I manure my self, both in courage (which is the stronger) and also in
fortune, that if all things else shou ld forsake me, I might find something wherewith to
please and satisfie my self. EleusHippias did not only store himself with learning, that
in time of need he might joyfully withdraw himself amongst the Muses, and be
sequestred from all other company; nor only with the knowledge of Philosophie to teach
his mind to be contented with her, and when his chance should so dispose of him,
manfully to pass over such incommodities as exteriorlie might come unto him; but,
moreover, he was so curious in learning to dresse his meat, to notte his hair, to make his
cloathes, breeches and shoes, that as much as could possibly be he might wholly rely and
trust to himself, and be freed from all forraine helpe. A man does more freely and more
blithely enjoy borrowed goods when it is not a bounden jovissance and constrained
through neede, and that a man has in his will the power and in his fortune the means to
live without them. I know my self well. But it is very hard for me to imagine any
liberalitie of another body so pure towards me, or suppose any hospitalitie so free, so

hartie and genuine, as would not seem affected, tyrannical, disgraced and attended-on by
reproach, if so were that necessitie had forced and tied me unto it. As to give is an
ambitious quality, and of prerogative, so is taking a quality of submission. Witnes the
injurious and pick-thanke refusall that Bajazeth made of the presents which Themir had
sent him. And those which in the behalfe of Soliman the Emperor were sent to the
Emperor of Calicut, did so vex him at the heart that he did not only utterly reject and
scornfully refuse them, saying that neither himself nor his predecessors before him were
accustomed to take any thing, and that their office was rather to give; but beside he caused
the Ambassadors, to that end sent unto him, to be cast into a deepe dungeon. When Thetis
(says Aristotle) flattereth Jupiter, when the Lacedemonians flatter the Athenians, they do
not thereby intend to put them in mind of the good they have done them, which is ever
hateful, but of the benefits they have received of them. Those I see familiarly to employ
and make use of all men, to begge and borrow of all men, and engage themselves to all
men, would doubtlesse never do it, knew they as I do, or tasted they as I have done, the
sweet content of a pure and undepending liberty, and if therewithall (as a wiseman ought)
they did duly ponder what it is for a man to engage himself into such an obligation, or
liberty depriving bond. It may happily be paid sometimes, but it can never be utterly
dissolved. It is a cruel bondage to him that loves throughly and by all means to have the
free scope of his liberty. Such as are best and most acquainted with me know whether
ever they saw any man living less soliciting, less craving, less importuning or less
begging then I am, or that less employeth or chargeth others, which if I be, and that
beyond all modern example, it is no great wonder, sithence so many parts of my humors
or manners contribute thereunto. As a natural kind of stubbornnesse, an impatience to be
denied, a contraction of my desires and desseignes, and an insufficiencie or unto-
wardlinesse in all manner of affairs; but above all, my most favoured qualities, lethall
sloathfulnesse, and a genuine liberty, by all which means I have framed all habite
mortally to hate, to be beholding to any creature els, or to depend of other then unto and of
my self. True it is, that before I employ the beneficence or liberality of an other, in any
light or waighty occasion, small or urgent neede soever, I do to the utmost power employ
all that ever I am able to avoid and forbeare it. My friends do strangelie importune and
molest me, when they solicite and urge me to entreate a third man. And I deem it a
matter of no less charge and imputation to disengage him that is endebted unto me, by
making use of him, then to engage my self unto him that oweth me nothing. Both which
conditions being removed, let them not looke for any cumbersome, negotious and careful
matter at my hands (for I have denounced open war unto all manner of carke and care); I
am commodiously easy and ready in times of any bodies necessities and I have also more
avoyded to receive, then sought to give, which (as Aristotle says) is also more facile. My
fortune has afforded me small means to benefit others, and that little she has bestowed
on me, the same has she also meanely and indifferently placed. Had she made me to be
so borne that I might have kept some rank amongst men, I would then have been
ambitious in procuring to be beloved, but never to be feared or admired. Shall I express it
more insolentlie? I would have had as much regard unto pleasing as unto profiting. Cyrus
does most wiselie, and by the mouth of an excellent Captain and also a better

Philosopher, esteeme his bountie and praise his good deedes far beyond his valor and
above his warlike-conquests. And Scipio the elder, wherever he seeketh to prevaile
and set forth himself, rateth his debonairitie and valueth his humanitie above his courage
and beyond his victories, and has ever this glorious saying in his mouth: ’That he has
left his enemies as much cause to love him as his friends.’ I will therefore say that if a man
thus owe any thing, it ought to be under a more lawfull title then that whereof I speak, to
which the law of this miserable war does engage me, and not of so great a debt, as that
of my totall preservation and whole estate, which does unreparablie overwhelme me. I
have a thousand times gone to bed in mine house, imagining I should the very same night
either have been betrayed or slain in my bed; compounding and conditioning with
fortune that it might be without apprehension of feareful astonishment and languishment;
And after my praiers have cried out,
Impius hæc tam culta novalia miles habebit? -- Virg. Eclog. i. 11.
Shall these our grounds so deekt and drest,
By godles soldiers be possest?
What remedie? It is the place where my self and most of my ancestors were borne:
therein have they placed their affection and their name. We harden ourselves unto
whatsoever we accustome ourselves. And to a wretched condition, as ours is, custom
has been a most favourable present, given us by nature, which enureth and lulleft our
sense asleepe to the suffring of diverse evils. Civill wars have this one thing worse then
other wars, to cause every one of us to make a watch-tower of his own house.
Quam miserum, porta vitam muroque tueri,
Vixque suæ tutum viribus esse domus! -- Ovid. Trist. iv. El. i. 69.
How hard with gate and wall our life to gard,
And scarce be safe in our own houses bard!
It is an irkesome extremity for one to be troubled and pressed even in his own houshold
and domesticall rest. The place wherein I dwell is ever both the first and last to the battery
of our troubles, and where peace is ever [never?] absolutely discerned.
Tum quoque cum pax est, trepidant formidine belli -- Lucan. i. 256.
Ev’n when in peace they are,
They quake for fear of war.
-----quoties pacem fortuna lacessit,
Hac iter est bellis, melius fortuna, dedisses

Orbe sub Eoo sedem, gelidaque sub Arcto,
Errantesque domos. -- Ibid. 252.
As oft as fortune troubleth peace, their race,
Warres makes this way: fortune with better grace,
In the Easterne world you shouldst have giv’n them place,
Or wandring tents for war, under the cold North-starre.
I sometimes draw the means to strengthen my self against these considerations, from
carelesnesse and idlenesse, which also in some sort bring us unto resolution. It often
befalleth me, with some pleasure, to imagine what mortal dangers are, and to expect
them. I do even hood-winkt, with my head in my bosome and with stupidities, plunge my
self into death, without considering or knowing it, as into a deep, hollow and bottomlesse
abysse, which at one leape does swallow me up, and at an instant does cast me into an
eternall slumber, full of insipiditie and indolencie. And in these short, sudden or violent
deaths, the consequence I fore-see of them affords me more comfort then the effect of
fear. They say, that even as life is not the best because it is long, so death is the best
because it is short. I estrange not my self so much by being dead, as I enter into
confidence with dying. I enwrap and shrowd my self in that storme which shall blinde
and furiously wrap me with a ready and insensible charge. Yet if it hapned (as some
gardners say) that those Roses and Violets are ever the sweeter and more odoriferous that
grow near unto Garlike and Onions, forasmuch as they sucke and draw all the ill savours
of the ground unto them, so that these depraved natures would draw and sucke’all the
venome of mine aire and infection of my climate, and by their neerenesse unto me make
me so much the better and purer, that I might not lose all. That is not, but of this,
something may be, forasmuch as goodnesse is the fairer and more attracting when it is
rare, and that contrarietie stifneth and diversitie encloseth well doing in itself, and by the
jealousie of opposition and glory it does enflame it. Theeves and stealers (godamercie
their kindness) have in particular nothing to say to me: no more have I to them. I should
then have to do with over-many sorts of men. Alike consciences lurke under diverse kinds
of garments, Alike crueltie, disloialtie and stealing. And so much the worse, by how much
it is more base, more safe and more secret under the colour of laws. I hate less an open-
professed injurie then a deceiving traiterous wrong, an hostile and war-like then a
peacefull and lawfull. Our feaver has seased upon a body which it has not much
empaired. The fire was in it, but now the flame has taken hold of it. The report is greater,
the hurt but little. I ordinarily answere such as demand reasons for my voiages: That I
know what I shunne, but wot not what I seek. If one tell me there may be as little sound
health amongst strangers, and that their manners are neither better nor purer then ours, I
answere first, that it is very hard:
Tam multæ scelerum facies. -- Virg. Georg. i. 506.
The formes so manifold

Of wickednesse we hold.
Secondly, that it is ever a gain to change a bad estate for an uncertaine. And that others
evils should not touch us so neare as ours. I will not forget this, that I can never mutiny so
much against France but I must needs looke on Paris with a favourable eye: It has my
hart from my infancy, whereof it has befalne me as of excellent things: the more other
fair and stately cities I have seen since, the more her beauty has power and does still
usurpingly gain upon my affection. I love that City for her own sake, and more in her
only subsisting and own being then when it is full fraught and embellished with forraine
pompe and borrowed garish ornaments: I love her so tenderly that even her spotts, her
blemishes and her warts are desire unto me. I am no perfect Frenchman, but by this great-
matchlesse City, great in people, great in the felicitie of her situation; but above al, great
and incomparable in varietie and diversitie of commodities. The glory of France, and one
of the noblest and chief ornaments of the world. God of his mercy free her, and chase
away all our divisions from her: Being entirely united to herself, I find her defended
from all other violence. I forewarn her, that of all factions, that shall be the worst which
shall breed discord and sedition in her. And for her sake, I only fear herself. And surely
I am in as great fear for her as for any other part of our state. So long as she shall
continue, so long shall I never want a home or retreat to retire and shrowd my self at all
times a thing able to make me forget the regret of all other retreates. Not because Socrates
has said it, but because such is in truth my humor, and perhaps not without some
excuse, to esteeme all men as my countrymen; and as I kindly. embrace a Polonian as a
Frenchman, postponing this natural bond to universall and common. I am not greatly
strucken with the pleasantnesse of natural aire. Acquaintances altogether new and wholly
mine do in my conceit countervaile the worth of all other vulgar and casual
acquaintances of our neighbors. Friendships meerely acquired by ourselves do
ordinarily exceed those to w hich we are joined either by communication of climate or
affinity of blood. Nature has plac’t us in the world free and unbound, we emprison our
selves into certain straights: As the Kings of Persia, who bound themselves never to
drinke other water then of the river Choaspez, foolishly renouncing all lawfull right of use
in all other waters, and for their regard dried up all the rest of the world. What Socrates
did in his latter dayes, to deem a sentence of banishment worse then a doom of death
against himself, being of the mind I am now, I shall never be neither so base minded nor
so strictly habituated in my country that I would follow him. The celestiall lives have
diverse images which I embrace more by estimation then by affection. And some too
extraordinary, and so highly elevated, which because I am not able to conceive, I cannot
embrace by estimation. This humor was very tenderly apprehended by him who deemed
all the world to be his city. True it is he disdained peregrinations, and had not much set his
foote beyond the territory of Athens. What if he bewailed the mony his friend offred to lay
out, to disengage his life, and refused to come out of prison, by the intercession of others,
because he would not disobey the laws in a time wherein they were otherwise so
corrupted? These examples are of the first kind for me. Of the second there are others,
which I could find in the very same man. Many of these rare examples exceed the power

of my action; but some exceed also the force of my judgement.Besides these reasons, I
deem travell to be a profitable exercise. The mind has therein a continuall excitation, to
marke things unknown, and note new objects. And as I have often said: ’I know no better
schoole to fashion a man’s life then uncessantly to propose unto him the diversitie of so
many other mens lives, customs, humors, and fantasies; and make him taste or
apprehend one so perpetuall variety of our natures, shapes, or formes. Therein the body is
neither absolutely idle nor wholly troubled, and that moderate agitation does put him into
breath.’ My self, as crazed with the collicke as I am, can sit eight, indeed sometimes ten
hours on horse-backe, without wearinesse or tyring.
Vires ultra sortemque senectæ. -- Virg. Æn. vi. 114.
Beyond strength ordinary,
Which old yeeres use to carry.
No weather is to me so contrary as the scorching heat of the parching Sunne. For, these
Umbrels or riding canapies, which since the ancient Romans, the Italians use, do more
weary the arms then ease the head. I would faine-faine know what industry it was in the
Persians, so anciently, and even in the infancy of luxuriousnesse (as Xenophon reporteth)
to fanne themselves, and at their pleasures to make cold shades. I love rainy and durty
weather as duckes do. The change either of aire or climate does nothing distemper me.
All heavens are likewise to me, I am never vexed or beaten, but with internall alterations,
such as I produce my self, which surprise and possesse me least in times of Wayfaring. It
is a hard matter to make me resolve of any journey; but if I be once on the way, I hold out
as long and as far as another. I strive as much in small as I labor in great enterprises;
and to prepare my self for a short journey or to visite a friend, as to undertake a far set
voiage. I have learnt to frame my journeyes after the Spanish fashion, all at once and out-
right, great and reasonable. And in extreme heats I travell by night, from Sunne-set to
Sunne rising. The other fashion, confusedly and in haste to bait by the way and dine,
especially in Winter, when the days are so short, is both troublesome for man and
incommodious for horse. My Jades are the better, and hold out longer. No horse did ever
faile me that held out the first days journey with me. I water them in all waters, and only
take care of their last watering, that before I come to mine Inne they have way enough to
heat their water. My slothfulnesse to rise in the morning alloweth such as follow me
sufficient leisure to dine before we take horse. As for me, I never feed over-late: I
commonly get an appetite in eating, and no otherwise: I am never hungry but at the table.
Some complain that being maried, and well strucken in years, I have enured my self,
and been pleased to continue this exercise. They do me wrong. The best time for a man
to leave his house is when he has so ordered and settled the same that it may continue
without him; and when he has so disposed his affairs, that they may answere the ancient
course and wonted form. It is much more indiscretion, and an argument of want of
judgement, to go from home and leave no trusty guard in his house, and which for lacke
of care may be slow or forgetfull in providing for such necessities as in your absence it

may stand in need of. The most profitable knowledge and honourablest occupation for a
matron or mother of a familie is the occupation and knowledge of huswiferie. I see diverse
covetous, but few huswifes. It is the mistresse-quality that all men should seek after, and
above all other endeavour to find, as the only dowry; that serveth either to ruine and
overthrow, or to save and enrich our houses. Let no man speak to me of it; according as
experience has taught me, I require in a maried woman the Oeconomicall virtue above
all others. Wherein I would have her absolutely skilfull, since by my absence I commit the
charge and bequeath the full government of my houshold to her. I see (and that to my
grief) in diverse houses the master or goodman come home at noone all weary, durty and
dusty, with drudging and toiling about his business; when the mistresse or good-wife is
either scarce up, or if she be, she is yet in her closet, dressing, decking, smugging, or
trimming of herself. It is a thing only fitting Queenes or Princes; whereof some doubt
might be made. It is ridiculous that the idlenesse and unjust that the lithernesse of our
wives should be fostered with our sweat and maintained by our travell. No man (as near
as I can) shall fortune to have a more free and more absolute use, or a more quiet and
more liquid fruition of his goods then I have. If the husband bring matter, nature herself
would have women to bring form. Concerning duties of wedlocke-friendship, which
some happily imagine to be interessed or prejudiced by the husbands absence, I believe it
not. Contrariwise, it is a kind of intelligence that easily growes cold by an over-
continuall assistance, and decaieth by assiduitie; for to stand still at racke and manger
breedeth a satietie. Every strange woman seems to us an honest woman: And all feel
by experience that a continuall seeing one another cannot possibly represent the pleasure
men take by parting and meeting again. These interruptions fill me with a new kind of
affection toward my own people, and yield me the use of my house more pleasing:
vicissitude does now and then en-earnest my mind toward one, and then toward another.
I am not ignorant how true amitie has arms long enough to embrace, to claspe and
holde from one corner of the world unto another; namely in this, where is a continuall
communication of offices that cause the obligation and reviv e the remembrance thereof.
The stoickes say that there is so great an affinitie and mutual relation betweene wise men
that he who dineth in France feedeth his companion in Egypt; and if one of them do but
hould up his finger, where ever it be, all the wise men dispersed upon the habitable land
feel a kind of aid thereby. Jovissance and possession appertaine chiefly unto
imagination. It embraceth more earnestly and uncessantly what she goeth to fetch, then
what we touch. Summon and count all your daily ammusements, and you shall find you
are then furthest and most absent from your friend when he is present with you. His
assistance releaseth your attention, and gives your thoughts liberty at all times and upon
every occasion to absent themselves. If I be at Rome, or any where else, I hold, I survay,
and governe my house and the commodities which I have left about and in it. I even see
my walles, my trees, my grasse, and my rents to stand, to grow, to decay, and to diminish,
within an inch or two of that I should do when I am at home.
Ante oculos errat domus, errat forma locorum.

My house is still before mine eyes,
There still the form of places lies.
If we but only enjoy what we touch, farewell our crownes when they are in our coffers,
and adiew to our children when they are abroad or a hunting; we would have them nearer.
In the garden is it far off? within halfe a days journey ? What, within ten leagues, is it
far or near? If it be near, what is eleven, twelve, or thirteene? and so step by step.
Verely that woman who can prescribe unto her husband how many steps end that which is
near, and which step in number begins the distance she counts far, I am of opinion that
she stay him betweene both.
------ excludat jurgia finis.-- Hor. ii. Epist. i. 38.
Let the conclusion, Exclude confusion.
Utor permiso, caudæque pilos ut equinæ.
Paulatim vello: et demo unum, demo etiant unum
Dum cadat elusus ratione ruentis acervi. -- Ibid. 45
. I use the grant, and plucke by one and one
The horse-tail haires, till when the bush is gone
I leave the Jade a curtall tail or none.
And let them boldly call for Philosophy to helpe them. To whom some might reproach,
since she neither discerneth the one nor other end of the joint, betweene the overmuch
and the little, the long and the short, the light and the heavy, the neare and the far, since
she neither knowes the beginning nor ending thereof, that she does very uncertainly judge
of the middle. Rerum natura nullam nobis dedit cognitionem finium: ’Nature has
affoorded us no knowledge of her ends.’ Are they not yet wives and friendes of the
deceased that are not at the end of this, but in the other world? we embrace both those
that have been, and those which are not yet, not only the absent. We did not condition
when we were maried, continually to keep ourselves close hugging one another as some,
I wot not what little creatures do we see daily; or as those bewitched people of Karenti,
in a kind of dogged manner. And a woman should not have her eyes so greedily or so
dotingly fixed on her husband’s fore-part, that if neede shall require she may not view his
hinderpartes. But might not the saying of that cunning painter, who could so excellently
set foorth their humors and portray their conditions, fitly be placed here, lively to
represent the cause of their complaints?
Uxor, si cesses, aut te amare cogitat,
Aut tete amare, aut potare, aut animo obsequi,
Et tibi bene esse soli, cum subi sit male. -- Ter. Adelph. act. i. sc. 1.

If you be slow, your wife thinkes that in love you are,
Or are belov’d, or drinke, or all for pleasure care,
And that you only fare-well when she ill does fare.
Or might it be that opposition and contradiction do naturally entertaine, and of
themselves nourish them; and that they are sufficiently accommodated, provided they
disturbe and incommode you? In truly perfect friendship wherein I presume to have well-
grounded experience, I give my self more unto my friend than I draw him unto me. I do
not only rather love to do him good, then he should do any to me, but also that he
should rather do good unto himself then unto me: For then does he me most good when
he does it to himself. And if absence be either pleasing or beneficiall unto him, it is to me
much more pleasing then his presence; and that may not properly be termed absence
where means and waies may be found to enter-advertise one another. I have heeretofore
made good use and reaped commoditie by our absence and distance. We better
replenished the benefit and extended further the possession of life by being divided and
far-asunder: he lived, he rejoiced, and he saw for me and I for him, as fully as if he had
been present: Being together, one partie was idle: We confounded one another. The
separation of the place made the conjunction of our mindes and wills the richer. This
insatiate and greedy desire of corporall presence does somewhat accuse the weakenesse
in the jovissance of soules. Concerning age, which some allege against me, it is cleane
contrary. It is for youth to subject and bondage itself to common opinions, and by force
to constraine itself for others. It may fit the turn of both the people and itself: We
have but overmuch to do with ourselves alone. According as natural commodities faile
us, let us sustain ourselves by artificiall means. It is injustice to excuse youth in
following her pIeasnres, and forbid age to devise and seek them. When I was yong I
concealed my wanton and covered my youthfull passions with wit; and now being aged, I
endeavour to pass the sadde and incident to yeeres with sport and debauches. Yet do
Platoes laws forbid men to travell abroad before they are forty or fifty years of age, that
so their travell may sort more profitable and proove more instructive. I should more
willingly consent to this other second article of the said laws, which forbiddeth men to
wander abroad after they are once threescore. Of which age few that travell far journies
return home again. What care I for that? I undertake it not either to return or to perfect
the same. I only undertake it to be in motion: So long as the motion pleaseth me, and I
walke that I may walke. Those run not that run after a Benefice or after a hare.But
they run that run at barriers and to exercise their running. My design is every
where divisible, it is not grounded on great hopes: each day makes an end of it. Even so is
my lifes voiage directed. Yet have I seen diverse far countries where I would have been
glad to have been staied. Why not? If Chrysippus, Diogenes, Cleanthes, Antipater, and
Zeno, with so many other wise men of that roughly-severe and severely-strict Sect,
forsooke their Countries (without just cause to be offended with them), only to enjoy
another aire? Truly the greatest grief of my peregrinations is, that I cannot have a firme
resolution to establish my abiding where I would. And that I must ever resolve with my

self to return for to accommodate my self onto common humors, If I should fear to
die in any other place then where I was borne, if I thought I should die less at my ease
far from my own people, I would hardly go out of France; nay, I should scarcely
go out of my own parish without feeling some dismay. I feel death ever pinching me
by the throat or pulling me by the backe: But I am of another moulde; to me it is ever one,
and at all times the same. Nevertheles, if I were to chuse, I think it should rather be on
horsebacke than in a bed, from my home and far from my friends. There is more harts-
sorrow than comfort in taking ones last farewell of his friends. I do easily forget or
neglect these duties or complements of our common or civill courtesy. For, of Offices
appertaining to unaffected amitie, the same is the most displeasing and offensive: And I
should as willingly forget to give a body that great adiew or eternall farewell. If a body
reape any commoditie by this assistance, he also findes infinite inconveniences in it. I
have seen diverse die most piteously, compassed and beset round with their friends and
servants: Such multitudes and thronging of people does stifle them. It is against reason and
a testimony of smal affection, and little care they have that you should die at rest. One
offendeth your eyes, another molesteth your ears, the third vexeth your mouth: You have
neither sense nor limme, or parte of your body, but is tormented and grieved. Your hart is
ready to burst for pittie to hear your friends moanes and complaints, and to rive asunder
with spite to hear perhaps some of their wailings and moanes that are but feigned and
counterfet. If a man have ever had a mild or tender nature, being weake and readie to die,
he must then necessarily have it more tender and relenting. It is most requisite that in so
urgent a necessitie one have a gentle hand, and fitly applied to his senses, to scratch him
where he itcheth, or else he ought not be clawed at all. If we must needs have the helpe of
a Midwife to bring us into this world, there is reason we should also have the aiding-hand
of a wise man to deliver us out of the same. Such a one, and therewithall a true friend,
should a man before-hand purchase very dear, only for the service of such an occasion. I
am not yet come to that disdainfull vigor which so fortifieth itself that at such times
nothing aideth nor nothing troubleth; I flie a lower pitch. I seek to squat my self and
steale from that passage, not by fear, but by Art. My intent is not in such an action to
make either trial or show of my constancy. Wherefore? Because then shall the right and
interest I have in reputation cease. I am content with a death united in itself, quiet and
solitarie, wholly mine, convenient to my retired and private life. Cleane contrary to the
Roman superstition, where he was judged unhappy that died without speaking, and had
not his nearest friends to close his eyes. I have much adoe to comfort my self, without
being troubled to comfort others; cares and vexations enow in my mind without needing
circumstances to bring me new; and sufficient matter to entertaine my self without
borrowing any. This share belongs not to the part of societie: It is the act of one man
alone. Let us live, laugh and be merry amongst our friends, but die and yield up the ghost
amongst strangers and such as we know not. He who has money in his purse shall ever
find some ready to turn his head, make his bedde, rubbe his feet, attend him, and that
will trouble and importune him no longer than he list, and will ever show him an
indifferent and well-composed countenance, and without grumbling or grudging give a
man leave to do what he please, and complain as he list. I dayly endeavor by discourse

to shake off this childish humor and inhumane conceit, which causeth that by our griefes
and paines we ever desire to moove our friends to compassion and sorrow for us, and with
a kind of sympathy to condole our miseries and passions. We endeare our
inconveniences beyond measure to exact tears from them: And the constancy we so
much commend in all others, undauntedly to endure all evil fortune, we accuse and
upbraid to our neerest allies when they molest us; we are not contented they should have a
sensible feeling of our calamities if they do not also afflict themselves for them. A man
should, as much as he can, set foorth and extend his joy, but to the utmost of his power
suppresse and abridge his sorrow. He that will causelessly be moaned and sans reason,
deserveth not to be pitied when he shall have cause and reason for it. To be ever
complaining and alwaies moaning is the way never to be moaned and seldom to be
pitied; and so often to seem over passionately pitifull is the meane to make no man
feelingly ruthful towards others. He that makes himself dead, being alive, is subject to be
counted alive when he is dying. I have seen some take pepper in the nose, forasmuch as
they were told that they had a cheerful countenance, that they looked well, that they had
a temperate pulse; to force laughter because some betraied their recovery, and hate their
health because it was not regreetable. And which is more, they were no women. I for the
most represent my infirmities such as they are: And shunne such words as are of evil
presage, and avoid composed exclamations. If not glee and mirth, at least an orderly setled
countenance of the bystanders and assistants is sufficiently-convenient to a wise and
discreet sicke-man, who, though he see himself in a contrary state, he will not picke a
quarrel with health. He is pleased to be told the same sound and strong in others, and at
least for company-sake to enjoy his part of it. Though he feel and find himself to faint
and sinke down, he does not altogether reject the conceits and imaginations of life, nor
does he avoid common entertainments. I will studie sicknesse when I am in health, when it
comes it will really enough make her impression without the helpe of my imagination. We
deliberately prepare ourselves beforehand for any voiage we undertake, and therein, are
resolved; the hour is set when he wil take horse, and we give it to our company in whose
favor we extend it. I find this unexpected profit by the publication of my maners, that in
some sort it serveth me for a rule. I am sometimes surprised with this consideration not to
betray the history of my life. This public declaration bindes me to keep my self within
my course, and not to contradict the image of my conditions, commonly less disfigured
and gain-said then the malignity and infirmitie of modern judgements does bear. The
uniformitie and singlenesse of my manners produces a visage of easy interpretation; but
because the fashion of them is somewhat new and strange, and out of use, it gives
detraction to fair play. Yet is it true, that to him who will go about loyally to injure me,
me thinkes I do sufficiently affoord him matter whereby he may detract and snarle at my
avowed and knowen imperfections, and wherewith he may be satisfied, without vain
contending and idle skirmishing. If my self by preoccupating his discovery and
accusation he thinkes I barre him of his snarling, it is good reason he take his right
towards amplification and extension: Offence has her rights beyond justice: And that the
vices whereof I strew him the rootes in me, he should amplifie them to trees. Let him
not only employ thereunto those that possesse me, but those which but threaten me.

Injurious vices, both in quality and in number. Let him beate me that way. I should
willingly embrace the example of Dion the Philosopher. Antigonus going about to scoffe
and quip at him touching his birth and offspring, he interrupted him and took the worde
out of his mouth: I am’ (said he ) ’the son of a bond slave, a butcher, branded for a
rogue, and of a whoore, whom my father by reason of his base fortune took to wife. Both
were punished for some misdeede. Being a child, an orator bought me as a slave, liking
me for my beautie and comelinesse; and dying, left me all his goods; which having
transported into this citie of Athens, I have applied my self unto Philosophy. Let not
Historians busie themselves in seeking news of me; I will at large blazon my self, and
plainely tell them the whole discourse.’ A generous and free-minded confession does
disable a reproch and disarme an injurie. So it is, that when all cards be told, me seems
that I am as oft commended as dispraised beyond reason. As also me thinks, that even
from my infancie, both in rank and degree of honor, I have had place given me, rather
above and more than less and beneath that which appertained to me. I should better like
to be in a countrie where these orders might either be reformed or contemned. Among
men, after that striving or altercation for the prerogative or upper hand in going or sitting
exceedeth three replies, it becomes incivill. I neither fear to yield and give place, nor
to follow and proceed unjustly, so I may avoid such irkesome and importunate
contestations. And never did man desire precedencie or place before me, but I quitted the
same without grudging. Besides the profit I reape by writing of my self, I have hoped for
this other, that if ever it might happen my humors should please or sympathize with
some honest man, he would before my death seek to be acquainted with me, or to
overtake me. I have given him much ground: For whatsoever a long acquaintance or
continuall familiarity might have gained him in many wearisome years, the same has
he in three dayes fully seen in this Register, and that more safely and more exactly. A
pleasant fantazie is this of mine, many things I would be loath to tell a particular man, I
utter to the whole world. And concerning my most secret thoughts and inward knowledge,
I send my dearest friends to a Stationers shop.
Excutienda damus præcordia. -- Pers. Sat. v. 22.
Our very entrailes we
Lay forth for you to see.
If by so good markes and tokens I had ever knowen or heard of any one man that in this
humor had been answerable to me, I would assuredly have wandred very far to find
him out: For, the exceeding joy of a sortable, and in one consent agreeing company,
cannot (in mine opinion) be sufficiently endeared or purchased at too high a rate. Oh God!
who can express the value or conceive the true worth of a friend? How true is that
ancient golden saying, that the use of a friend is more necessary and pleasing, then of the
elements, water and fire. But to return to my former discourse. There is, then, no greater
inconvenience in dying far from home and abroad. We esteeme it a part of duty and
decencie to withdraw ourselves for natural actions less hideous and less disgracefull

then this. But also those that come unto that in languishing manner to draw a long space of
life should not happily wish with their misery to trouble a whole family? Therefore did
the Indians of a certain countrie deem it just and lawfull to kill him that should fall into
such necessitie. And in another of their Provinces they thought it meet to forsake him, and
as well as he could, leave him alone to seek to save himself. To whom at last proove
they not themselves tedious and intolerable? Common offices proceed not so far.
Perforce you teach cruelty unto your best friends, obdurating by long use both wife and
children, not to feel, nor to conceive, nor to moan your evils any longer. The groanes
and outcries of my chollicke cause no more ruth and wailing in any body. And should we
conceive pleasure by their conversation (which seldom happens, by reason of the
disparitie of conditions, which easily produces either contempt or envy towards what
man soever) is it not too-too much therwith to abuse a whole age? The more I should see
them with a good heart to strain themselves for me, the more should I bewaile their
pain. The law of curtesie alloweth us to leane upon others, but not so unmanerly to lie
upon them and underpropt ourselves in their ruine. As he who caused little infants to be
slain, that with their innocent blood he might be cured of a malady he had. Or another,
who was continually stored with young tendrels or lasses to keep his old frozen limbs
warme a nights, and entermix the sweetness of their breath with his old-stinking and
offensive vapours. Decrepitude is a solitary quality. I am sociable even unto excess, yet
do I think it reasonable at last to subtract my opportunity from the sight of the world,
and hatch it in my self. Let me shrowd and shrugge my self into my shell as a tortoise,
and learne to see men without taking hold of them. I should outrage them in so steepe a
passage. It is now high time to turn from the company. But here will some say that in
these far journies you may peraventure fall into some miserable dog-hole or poore
cottage, where you shall want all needfull things. To whom I answere, that for things most
necessary in such cases I ever carry most of them with me: And that where-ever we are
we cannot possibly avoid fortune if she once take upon her to persecute us. When I am
sicke I want nothing that is extraordinary; what nature cannot work in me I will not have
a Bolus or a glister to effect. At the very beginning of my agues or sicknesses that cast me
down, whilst I am yet whole in my senses and near unto health, I reconcile my self to
God by the last duties of a Christian, whereby I find my self free and discharged, and
think I have so much more reason and authority over my sicknesse. I find less want of
notaries and counsell then of Physitians. What I have not disposed of my affairs or setled
of my state when I was in perfect health, let none expect I should do it being sicke.
Whatever I will do for the service of death is alwayes ready done. I dare not delay it one
only day. And if nothing be done it is as much to say that either some doubt has delaide
the choise: For sometimes it is a good choice not to chose at all: Or that absolutely I never
intended to do any thing. I write my book to few men and to few years. Had it been a
matter of lasting continuance, it should have been compiled in a better and more polished
language: According to the continuall variation that hitherto has followed our French
tongue, who may hope that its present form shall be in use fifty years hence? It dayly
changeth and slips our hands; and since I could speak the same it is much altred and
wellnigh halfe varied. We say it is now come to a full perfection. There is no age but says

as much of hirs. It lies not in my power, so long as it glideth and differeth and altereth as it
does, to keep it at a stay. It is for excellent and profitable compositions to fasten it unto
them, whose credit shall either diminish or encrease according to the fortune of our state.
For all that I fear not to insert therein diverse private articles, whose use is consumed
amongst men living now adayes, and which concerne the particular knowledge of some
that shall further see into it, then with a common understanding. When al is done, I would
not (as I often see the memory of the deceased tossed too and fro) that men should descant
and argue, Thus and thus he judged, thus he lived, thus he ment; had he spoken when his
life left him, he would have given I wot what: There is no man knew him better than my
self. Now, as much as modesty and decorum does permit me, I here give a taste of any
inclinations and an essay of my affection, which I do more freely and more willingly by
word of mouth to any that shall desire to be throughly informed of them. But so it is, that
if any man shall looke into these memorialls, he shall find that either I have said all or
desseigned all. What I cannot express, the same I point at with my finger.
Verum animo satis hæc vestigia parva sagaci
Sunt, per quæ possis cognoscere cætera tute. -- Lucr. i. 419.
But this small footing to a quick-sent mind
May serve whereby safely the rest to find.
I leave nothing to be desired or divined of me. If one must entertaine himself with
them, I would have it to be truly and justly. I would willingly come from the other world
to give him the lie that should frame me other then I had been; were it he meant to
honor me. I see that of the living, men never speak according to truth, and they are
ever made to be what they are not. And if with might and main I had not upheld a friend
of mine whom I have lately lost, he had surely been mangled and torn in a thousand
contrary shapes. But to make an end of my weake humors: I confesse that in travelling I
seldom alight in any place or come to any Inne, but first of all I cast in my mind
whether I may conveniently lie there, if I should chaunce to fall sicke, or dying, die at my
ease and take my death quietly. I will as nere as I can be lodged in some convenient part
of the house, and in particular from all noise or stinking savours; in no close, filthy, or
smoaky chamber. I seek to flatter death by these frivolous circumstances: Or, as I may
rather say, to discharge my self from all other trouble or encombrance, that so I may
wholly apply and attend her, who without that shall happily lie very heavily upon me. I
will have her take a full share of my lives cases and commodities; it is a great part of it
and of much consequence, and I hope it shall not belie what is past. Death has some
formes more easy then others, and assumeth diverse qualities according to all mens
fantazies. Among the natural ones, that proceeding of weakenesse and heavy dulnesse, to
me seems gentle and pleasant. Among the violent I imagine a precipice more hardly
then a ruine that overwhelmes me, and a cutting blow with a sword then a shot of an
harquebuse; and I would rather have chosen to drinke the potion of Socrates, then wound
my self as Cato did. And though it be all one, yet does my imagination perceive a

difference, as much as is betweene death and life to cast my self into a burning fornace or
in the channell of a shallow river. So foolishly does our fear respect more the meane then
the effect. It is but one instant, but of such moment that to pass the same according to my
desire, I would willingly renounce many of my lives dayes. Since all mens fantazies find
either excess or diminution in her sharpnesse, since every man has some choise
betweene the formes of dying, let us trie a little further whether we can find out some one
free from all sorrow and grief. Might not one also make it seem voluptuous, as did those
who died with Anthonie and Cleopatra? I omit to speak of the sharpe and exemplar
efforts that Philosophy and religion produce. But amongst men of no great fame some
have been found (as one Petronius and one Tigillinus at Rome) engaged to make
themselves away who by the tenderness of their preparations have in a manner lulled the
same asleepe. They have made it pass and glide away even in the midst of the security of
their accustomed pastimes and wanton recreations. Amongst harlots and good felowes no
speech of comfort, no mention of will or testament, no ambitious affectation of
constancy, no discourse of their future condition, no compunction of sinnes committed,
no apprehension of their soules-health, ever trouling them, amid sports, playes,
banketting, surfetting, chambering, jesting, music, and singing of amorous verses, and
all such popular and common entertainements. Might not we imitate this manner of
resolution in more honest affairs and more commendable attempts? And since there are
deaths good unto wise men and good unto fooles, let us find some one that may be good
unto such as are betweene both. My imagination presents me some easy and mild
countenance thereof, and (since we must all die) to be desired. The tyrants of Rome have
thought they gave that criminall offender his life to whom they gave the free choise of
death. But Theophrastus, a Philosopher so delicate, so modest, and so wise, was he not
forced by reason to dare to utter this verse, latinized by Cicero:
Vitam regit fortuna non sapientia. -- Cic. Tusc. Qu. v. Theoph. Calisth.
Fortune our life does rule,
Not wisdom of the schoole.
Fortune gives the facilitie of my lives-condition some aide, having placed it in such a
time wherein it is neither needfull nor combersome unto my people. It is a condition I
would have accepted in all the seasons of my age, but in this occasion to trusse my bag
and baggage and take up my bed and walke. I am particularly pleased that when I shall
die, I shall neither breede pleasure nor cause sorrow in them. Shee has caused (which is
the recompence of an artist) that such as by my death may pretend any materiall benefit,
receive thereby elswhere jointly a materiall loss and hinderance. Death lies sometimes
heavy upon us, in that it is burthensome to others; and interesseth us with their interest
almost as much as with ours, and sometimes more; indeed altogether. In this inconveniency
of lodging that I seek, I neither entermix pompe nor amplitude; For I rather hate it. But a
certain simple and humble proprietie, which is commonly found in places where less
Arte is, and that nature honoureth with some grace peculiar unto herself. Non ampliter

sed munditer convivium. Plus sales quam sumptus.(Plautin.) ’Not a great, but a neat feast.
More conceit then cost.’ And then it is for those who by their urgent affairs are compelled
to travell in the midst of deepe Winter, and amongst the Grisons, to be surprised by such
extreamities in their journies. But I who for the most part never travell but for pleasure,
will neither be so ill advised nor so simply guided. If the way be foul on my right hand,
I take the left. If I find my self ill at ease or unfit to ride, I stay at home. Which doing,
and observing this course, in very truth I see no place and come no where that is not as
pleasant, as convenient, and as commodious as my own house. True it is that I ever find
superfluitie superfluous, and observe a kind of troublesomenesse in delicatenesse and
plenty. Have I omitted or left any thing behind me that was worth the seeing? I return
backe; It is ever my way, I am never out of it. I trace no certain line, neither right nor
crooked. Comming to any strange place, find I not what was told me? As it often
fortuneth that others judgements agree not with mine, and have most times found them
false, I grieve not at my labor; I have learned that what was reported to be there is not. I
have my bodies complexion as free and my taste as common as any man in the world. The
diversity of fashions betweene one and other Nations concerneth me nothing , but by the
varieties-pleasure. Each custom has his reason. Bee the trenchers or dishes of wood, of
pewter, or of earth; be my meate boiled, rosted, or baked; butter or oyle, and that of
Olives or of Wallnuts, hot or colde, I make no difference, all is one to me. And as one that
is growing old, I accuse the generous faculties and had need that delicatenesse and choise
should stay the indiscretion of my appetite, and sometime ease and solace my stomacke.
When I have been out of France, and that to do me curtesie some have asked me
Whether I would be served after the French manner, I have jested at them, and have ever
thrust-in amongst the thickest tables and fullest of strangers. I am ashamed to see our men
besotted with this foolish humor, to fret and chafe when they see any fashions contrary to
theirs. They think themselves out of their element when they are out of their Village.
Where ever they come they keep their own country and hate, indeed abhorre all strange
manners. Meet they a countriman of theirs in Hungary, they feast that good fortune. And
what do they? Marry close and join together, to blame, to condemne, and to scorne so
many barbarous fashions as they see. And why not Barbarous since not French? Nay,
happily they are the better sort of men that have noted and so much exclaimed against
them. Most take going out but for coming home. They travell close and covered, with a
silent and incommunicable wit, defending themselves from the contagion of some
unknown air. What I speak of such puts me in mind in the like matter of that I have
heretofore perceived in some of your young Courtiers. They only converse with men of
their coate, and with disdains or pity looke upon us as if we were men of another world.
Take away their new fangled, mysterious, and affected courtly complements, and they are
out of their byase. As far to seek and short of us as we of them. That saying is true;
That An honest man is a man compounded. Cleane contrary, I travell fully glutted with our
fashions: Not to seek Gaskoines in Sicilie, I have left over many at home. I rather seek
for Græcians and Persians. Those I accost, Them I consider, and with such I endeavor to
be acquainted; to that I prepare and therein I employ my self. And which is more, me
seems I have not met with many maners that are not worth ours. Indeed I have not

wandred far, scarsly have I lost the sight of our Chimnies. Moreover, most of the casual
companies you meete withall by the way have more incommodity than pleasure, a matter I
do not greatly take hold of, and less now that age does particularize and in some sort
sequester me from common formes. You suffer for other or others endure for you. The
one inconvenience is yrkesome, the other troublesome, but yet the last is (in my conceipt)
more rude. It is a rare chaunce and seld-seen fortune, but of exceeding solace and
inestimable worth, to have an honest man of singular experience, of a sound judgement, of
a resolute understanding and constant resolution, and of manners conformable to yours,
to accompany or follow you with a good will. I have found great want of such a one in all
my voyages. Which company a man must seek with discretion and with great heed
obtaine before he wander from home. With me no pleasure is fully delightsome without
communication, and no delight absolute except imparted. I do not so much as apprehend
one rare conceipt, or conceive one excellent good thought in my mind, but me thinks I
am much grieved and grievously perplexed to have produced the same alone and that I
have no sympathizing companion to impart it unto. Si cum hac exceptione detur sapientia,
ut illam inclusam teneam, nec enunciem, rejiciam: ’If wisdom should be offered with this
exception, that I should keep it concealed and not utter it, I would refuse it.’ The other
strain’d it one note higher. Si contigerit ea vita sapienii, ut omnium rerum afluentibus
copiis, quamvis omnia, quæ cognitione digna sunt, summo otio secum ipse consideret et
contempletur; tamen si solitudo tanta sit, ut hominem videre non possit, excedat e vita:
(Cic. Offic. ii.) ’If a wiseman might lead such a life, as in abundance of all things he may
in full quiet contemplate and consider all things worthy of knowledge, yet if he must be so
solitary as he may see no man, he should rather leave such a life.’ Architas his opinion is
suitable to mine, which was that it would be a thing unpleasing to the very heavens, and
distastefull to man, to survay and walke within those immense and divine and coelestiall
bodies, without the assistance of a friend or companion; Yet is it better to be alone than in
tedious and foolish company. Aristippus loved to live as an alien or stranger every where:
Me si fata meis patereutur ducere vitam
Auspiciis. -- Virg. Æn. iv. 339.
If fates would me permit
To live as I think fit,
I should chose to weare out my life with my bum in the saddle, ever riding.
------ visere gestiens,
Qua parte debacchentur ignes,
Qua nebulæ pluviique rores. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. iii. 54.
Delighting much to go and see
Where firy heats rage furiously,

Where clouds and rainy dews most be.
Have you not more easy pastimes? What is it you want? Is not your house well seated,
and in a good and wholesome air? Sufficiently furnished and more then sufficiently
capable? His Royall Majesty has in great state been in the same, and more then once
taken his repast there. Does not your family in rule and government leave many more
inferior to her than above her eminency? Is there any locall thought or care that as
extrordinary does ulcerate, or as indigestible does molest you?
Quæ te nunc coquat et vexet sub pectore fixa. -- Enni, Cic. Senect. p.
Which now boyles in your brest,
And lets you take no rest.
Where do you imagine you may be without empeachment or disturbance? Nunquam
simpliciter fortuna indulger: ’Fortune never favors fully without exception.’ You see then
there is none but you that trouble and busie your self: and every where you shall follow
your self, and in all places you shall complain. For, Here below there is no satisfaction or
content, except for brutal or divine mindes. He who in so just an occasion has no
content, where does he imagine to find it? Unto how many thousands of men does such a
condition as yours bound and stay the limits of their wishes? Reforme but your self, by
that you may do all: Whereas towards fortune you have no right or interest but patience.
Nulla placida quies est, nisi quam ratio composuit: (Sen. Ep. lvi. m.) There is no pleasing
setled rest, but such as reason has made up.’ I see the reason of this advertisement, indeed I
perceive it well. But one should sooner have done, and more pertinently, in one bare word
to say onto me: Be wise. This resolution is beyond wisdom. It is her Worke and her
production. So does the Physition that is ever crying to a languishing, heart-broken sicke-
man, that he be merry and pull up a good heart; he should less foolishly persuade him if
he did but bid him be healthy; as for me, I am but a man of the common stamp. It is a
certain sound and of easy understanding precept: Be content with your own, that is to
say, with reason, the execution wherof not-withstanding is no more in the wiser sort than
in my self: It is a popular word, but it has a terrible far-reaching extension. What
comprehends it not? All things fall within the compasse of discretion and modification.
Wel I wot that being taken according to the bare letter, the pleasure of travell brings a
testimony of unquietnesse and irresolution. Which to say truth, are our mistrisse and
predominant qualities. Yea, I confesse it: I see nothing, be it but a dreame or by wishing
whereon I may take hold. Only varietie and the possession of diversitie does satisfie me,
if at least any thing satisfie me. In travell this does nourish me, that without interest I
may stay my self; and that I have means commodiously to divert my self from it. I love
a private life because it is by my own choice that I love it, not by a diffidence or dis-
agreeing from a public life, which perhaps is as much according to my complexion:
I thereby serve my Prince more joyfully and genuinely because it is by the free election of
my judgement and by my reason, without any particular obligation. And that I am not cast

or forced thereunto, because I am unfit to be received of any other, or am not beloved, so
of the rest. I hate those morsels that necessitie does carve me. Every commoditie of
which alone I were to depend, should ever hold me by the throat:
Alter remus aquas, alter mihi radat arenas. -- Propert. iii. El. ii. 23.
Let me cut waters with one oar,
With th’other shave the sandie shoare.
One string alone can never sufficiently hold me. You will say there is vanity in this
ammusement. But where not? And these goodly precepts are vanity, and Meere vanity is
all worldly wisdom. Dominus novit cogitationes sapientum, quoniam vanæ sunt: (Psal.
xciii. 11.) ’The Lord knowes the thoughts of the wise that they are vain.’ Such exquisite
subtilities are only fit for sermons. They are discourses that will send us into the other
world on horsebacke. Life is a materiall and corporall motion, an action imperfect and
disordered by its own essence; I employ or apply my self to serve it according to it
self.
Quisque suos patimur manes. -- Virg. Æn. vi. 743.
All of us for our merit,
Have Some attending spirit.
Sic est faciendum, ne contra naturam universam nihil contendamus, ea tamen
conservata, propriam sequamur: (Cic. Offic. i.) ’We must so work as we endeavor
nothing against nature in general, yet so observe it as we follow our own in speciall.’ To
what purpose are these heaven-looking and nice points of Philosophie, on which no
humane being can establish and ground itself? And to what end serve these rules that
exceed our use and excel our strength? I often see that there are certain Ideæs or formes
of life proposed unto us, which neither the proposer nor the Auditors have any hope at all
to follow, or and which is worse, no desire to attaine. Of the same paper whereon a Judge
wrote but even now the condemnation against an adulterer, he will teare a scantlin
thereon to write some love-lines to his fellow-judges wife. The same woman from whom
you came lately, and with whom you have committed that unlawfull-pleasing sport, will
soone after, even in your presence, rail and scold more bitterly against the same fault in
her neighbour than ever Portia or Lucrece could. And some condemne men to die for
crimes that themselves esteeme no faults. I have in my youth seen a notable man with one
hand to present the people most excellent and well-written verses, both for invention and
extreme licentiousnesse, and with the other hand, at the same instant, the most sharpe-
railing reformation, according to Divinitie, that happily the World has seen these many-
many years. Thus goes the world, and so go men. We let laws and precepts follow their
way, but we keep another course; Not only by disorder of manners, but often by opinion

and contarary judgment. Hear but a discourse of Philosophy read, the invention, the
pertinencie, does presently tickle your spirit and move you. There is nothing tickleth or
pricketh your conscience; it is not to her that men speak. Is it not true? Ariston said that
Neither Bath nor Lecture are of any worth, except the one wash cleane and the other
cleanse all filth away. One may busie himself about the barke when once the pith is
gotten out: As when we have drunke off the Wine we consider the graving and
workmanship of the cuppe. In all the parts of ancient Philosophie this one thing may be
noted, that one same work-man publisheth some rules of temperance and therewithall
some compositions of love and licentiousnesse. And Xenophon in Cliniæs bosome wrote
against the Aristippian virtue. It is not a miraculous conversion that so does wave and hull
them to and fro. But it is, that Solon does sometimes represent himself in his own
colours, and sometimes in form of a Law-giver; now he speaks for the multitude and
now for himself, And takes the free and natural rules to himself; warranting himself
with a constant and perfect sounduesse.
Curentur dubii medicis majoribus ægri. -- Juven. Sat. xiii. 124.
Let patients in great doubt,
Seeke great Physitians out.
Antisthenes alloweth a wise man to love and do what he list, without respect of laws,
especially in things he deemeth needfull and fit: Forasmuch as he has a better
understanding than they, and more knowledge of virtue. His Disciple Diogenes said: To
perturbations we should oppose reason, to fortune, confidence, and to laws nature; to
dainty and tender stomacks constrained and artificiall ordinances. Good stomackes are
simply served with the prescriptions of their natural appetite. So do our Phisitions, who,
whilst they tie their patients to a strik’t diet of a panada or a sirope, feed themselves upon a
melone, dainty fruits, much good meate, and drinke all manner of good Wine. I wot not
what Bookes are, nor what they meane by wisdom and philosophy (quoth the Curtizan
Lais), but sure I am those kinds of people knocke as often at my gates as any other men.
Be cause our licenciousnesse transports us commonly beyond what is lawfull and allowed,
our lives-precepts and laws have often been wrested or restrained beyond universall
reason.
Nemo satis credit tantum delinquere, quantum,
Permittas. -- Juven. Sat. xiv. 233.
No man thinkes it enough so far t’offend
As you give lawfull leave (and there to end).
It were to be wished there were a greater proportion betweene commandement and
obedience; And unjust seems that ayme or goale whereto one cannot possibly attaine.

No man is so exquisitely honest or upright in living but brings all his actions and thoughts
within compasse and danger of the laws, and that ten times in his life might not lawfully
be hanged. Yea happily such a man as it were pity and dangerously-hurtful to loose and
most unjust to punish him.
-----Olle, quid ad te,
De cute quid faciat ille, vel illa sua? -- Mart. vii. Epig. ix. 1.
Foole, what hast you to do, what he or she
With their own skinnes or themselves doing be?
And some might never offend the laws, that notwithstanding should not deserve the
commendations of vertuous men, and whom philosophy might meritoriously and justly
cause to be whipped; so troubled, dimme-sighted and partiall in this relation. We are
far enough from being honest according to God, for we cannot be such according to
ourselves. Humane wisdom could never reach the duties or attaine the devoires it had
prescribed unto itself. And had it at any time attained them, then would it doubtlesse
prescribe some others beyond them, to which it might ever aspire and pretend. So great an
enemy is our condition unto consistence. Man does necessarily ordaine unto himself to
be in fault. He is not very crafty to measure his duty by the reason of another being than
his own. To whom prescribes he that which he expects no man will performe? Is he
unjust in not dooing that which be cannot possibly atchieve? The laws which condemne
us not to be able, condemne us for that we cannot performe. If the worst happen, this
deformed liberty for one to present him-self in two places, and the actions after one
fashion, the discourses after an other, is lawfull in them which report things. But it cannot
be in them that acknowledge themselves as I do. I must walke with my penne as I go
with my feete. The common high way must have conference with other ways. Catoes
virtue was vigorous beyond the reason of the age he lived in, and for a man that
entermedled with governing other men destinated for the common service, it might be said
to have been a justice; if not unjust, at least vain and out of season. Mine own manners,
which scarse disagree one inch from those now current, make me notwithstanding in some
sort strange, uncouth and unsociable to my age. I wot not, whether it be without reason, I
am so distasted and out of liking with the world wherein I live and frequent; but well I
know I should have small reason to complain, the world were distasted and out of liking
with me, since I am so with it. The virtue assigned to the worlds affairs, it is a virtue
with sundry byases, turnings, bendings and elbowes, to apply and join itself to humane
imbecilities mixed and artificiall; neither right, pure or constant, nor meerely innocent.
Our Annales even to this day blame some one of our Kings to have over- simply suffered
himself to be led or misled by the conscientious persuasions of his Confessor. Matters of
state have more bold precepts.
----- exeat aula,
Qui vult esse pius. -- Lucan. Bell. Civ. i. 493.

He that will godly be,
From Court let him be free.
I have heretofore assayed to employ my opinions and rules of life as new, as rude, as
impolished, or as unpolluted as they we re naturally born with me, or as I have attained
them by my institution: and wherewith, if not so commodiously, at least safely in
particular, I serve my own turn unto the service of public affairs and benefit of my
Common-wealth. A scholasticall and novice virtue, but I have found them very unapt and
dangerous for that purpose. He that goeth in a press or throng of people must sometimes
step aside, hold in his elbowes, crosse the way, advance himself, start backe, and forsake
the right way according as it falls out: Live he not so much as he wouldhimselfe, but as
others will, not according to that he proposeth to himself, but to that which is proposed to
him: according to times, to men and to affairs, and as the skilfull Mariner saile with the
winde. Plato says, that who escapes untainted and cleane-handed from the managing of
the world, escapeth by some wonder. He sayes also that when he instituteth his
Philosopher as chief over a Common-wealth, he means not a corrupted or law broken
common-wealth as that of Athens, and much less as ours, with which wisdom herself
would be brought to a nonplus or put to her shifts. And a good hearb, transplanted into a
soile very diverse from her nature, does much sooner conforme itself to the soile then it
reformeth the same to itself. I feelingly perceive that if I were wholly to enure my self
to such occupations I should require much change and great repairing. Which could I
effect in me (and why not with time and diligence?) I would not. Of that little which in
this vocation I have made trial of, I have much distasted my self: I sometimes find
certain temptations arise in my mind towards ambition, but I start aside, bandie and
opinionate my self to the contrary:
At tu Catulle obstinatus obdura. -- Catul. Lyr. Epig. viii. 19.
Be you at any rate,
Obdurate, obstinate.
I am not greatly called, and I invite my self as little unto it. Libertie and idlenesse, my
chief qualities, are qualities diameterly contrary to that mysterie. We know not how to
distinguish mens faculties. They have certain divisions and limits uneasie and over nice
to be chosen. To conclude by the sufficiency of a private life, any sufficiency for public
use it is ill concluded; Some one directs himself well that cannot so well direct others,
and composeth Essayes that could not work effects. Some man can dispose and order a
siege that could but ill command and marshall a battle; and discourseth well in private that
to a multitude or a Prince would make but a bad Oration. Yea, perhaps, tis rather a
testimony to him that can do one that he cannot do the other, but otherwise. I find that
high spirits are not much less apt for base things then base spirits are for high matters.

Could it be imagined that Socrates would have given the Athenians cause to laugh at his
own charges, because he could never justly compt the suffrages of his tribe and make
report thereof unto the counsell? Truely the reverence I bear and respect I owe unto that
mans perfections deserveth that his fortune bring to the excuse of my principal
imperfections one so notable example. Our sufficiencie is retailed into small parcells.
Mine has no latitude, and is in number very miserable. Saturninus answered those who
had conferred all authority upon him, saying, ’Oh you, my fellow-soldiers, you have lost a
good Captain by creating him a bad General of an Armie.’ Who in time of infection
vanteth himself for the worlds-service to employ a genuine or sincere virtue, either
knowes it not (opinions being corrupted with manners; in good sooth hear but them paint
it forth, marke how most of them magnifie themselves for their demeanours, and how they
form their rules; in liew of portraying a virtue they only set forth meere injustice and
vice, and thus false and adulterate they present the same to the institution of Princes), or if
he know it he wrongfully boasteth himself; and whatever he says he does many things
whereof his own conscience accuses him. I should easily believe Seneca of the
experience he made of it in such an occasion, upon condition he would freely speak his
mind of it unto me. The honourablest badge of goodnesse in such a necessitie is
[ingenuously] for a man to acknowledge both his own and others faults; to stay and with
his might hinder the inclination towards evil, and avie to follow this course to hope and
wish better. In these dismembrings or havocks of France and divisions whereinto we are
miserably falne, I perceive every man travell and busie himself to defend his own cause,
and the better sort with much dissembling and falsehood. He that should plainely and
roundly write of it should write rashly and viciously. Take the best and justest part, what
is it else but the member of crased, worme-eaten and corrupted body? But of such a body
the member least sicke is called sound; and good reason why, because our qualities have
no title but in comparison. Civill innocency is measured according to places and seasons. I
would be glad to see such a commendation of Agesilaus in Xenophon, who, being
entreated of a neighbour Prince, with whom he had sometimes made warr, to suffer him to
pass through his countrie, was therewith well pleased; granting him free passage through
Peloponnese, and having him at his mercy did not only not emprison nor empoison him,
but, according to the tenour of his promise, without show or offence, or unkindenesse,
entertained him with all courtesy and humanitie. To such humors it were a matter of no
moment: At other times and elsewhere the liberty and magnanimity of such an action
shall be highly esteemed. Our gullish Gaberdines would have mockt at it, so little affinity
is there betweene the Spartan and the French innocencie. We have, notwithstanding, some
honest men amongst us; but it is after our fashion. He whose manners are in regularity
established above the age he liveth in, let him either wrest or muffle his rules; or (which I
would rather persuade him) let him withdraw himself apart and not medle with us. What
shall he gains thereby?
Egregium sanctumque virum si cerno, bimembri
Hoc monstrum puero, et miranti jam sub aratro
Piscibus inventis et foetæ comparo mulæ. -- Juven. Sat. xiii. 64.

See I a man of holinesse and vertues rare,
To births bimembred, under wonderful Plowshare
Fish found, or moiles with fole, this monster I compare.
One may bewaile the better times, but not avoide the present; one may desire other
magistrates, but notwithstanding he must obey those he has; And happily it is more
commendable to obey the wicked than the good. So long as the image of the received,
allowed, and ancient laws of this Monarchie shall be extant and shine in any corner
thereof, there will I be, there will I abide. And if by any disaster they shall chaunce to
have contradiction or empeachment amongst themselves, and produce two factions, or
doubtfull or hard choise; my election shall be to avoide, And, if I can, escape this storme.
In the meane while, either nature or the hazard of war shall lend me that helping hand. I
should freely have declared my self betweene Cæsar and Pompey. But betweene those
three theeves which came after, where either one must have hid himself or followed the
winde: which I deem lawfull, when reason swayeth no longer.
Quod diversus abis? -- Virg. Æn. v. 166.
Whither have you recourse,
So far out of your course?
This mingle-mangle is somewhat beside my text. I stragle out of the path; yet it is rather
by licence then by unadvisednesse: my fantasies follow one another, but sometimes a far
off, and looke one at another, but with an oblique looke. I have heretofore cast mine eyes
upon some of Platoes Dialogues, bemolted with a fantastic variety; the first part treateth
of love, all the latter of Rhetorick. They fear not those variances, and have a wonderful
grace in suffering themselves to be transported by the wind, or to seem so. The titles of
my chapters embrace not allwayes the matter; they often but glance at it by some marke:
as these others, Andria, Eunuchus; or these, Sylla, Cicero, Torquatus. I love a Poeticall
kind of march, by friskes, skips, and jumps. It is an arte (says Plato) light, nimble,
fleeting, and light braind. There are some treatises in Plutarke where he forgets his
theame, where the drift of his argument is not found but by incidencie and chaunce, all
stuffed with strange matter. Marke but the vagaries in his Dæmon of Socrates. Oh God!
what grace has the variation, and what beautie these startings and nimble escapes! And
then most, when they seem to employ carelesnesse and casualtie. It is the unheedie and
negligent reader that loses my subject, and not my life. Some word or other shall ever be
found in a corner that has relation to it, though closely couched. I am indiscreetly and
tumultuously at a fault; my stile and wit are still gadding likewise. A little folly is tolerable in
him, that will not be more sottish, say our masters precepts, and more their examples. A
thousand Poets labor and languish after the prose-manner, but the best ancient prose,
which I indifferently scatter here and there for verse, shineth every where, with a poettical
vigor and boldness, and representeth some aire or touch of its fury: Verily she ought to

have the maistry and preheminence given her in matters of speech. A Poet (says Plato)
seated on the Muses footestoole does in a fury powre out whatsoever commeth in his
mouth, as the pipe or cocke of a fountain, without considering or ruminating the same:
and many things escape him, diverse in colour, contrary in substance, and broken in
course. Antient Divinitie is altogether Poesie (say the learned) and the first Philosophie. It
is the original language of the Gods. I understand that the matter distinguisheth itself. It
sufficiently declareth where it changeth, where it concludeth, where it beginneth, and
where it rejoyneth; without enterlacings of words, joyning ligaments and binding seames
wrested-in for service of weake and unattentive ears, and without glossing or expounding
my self. What is he that would not rather not be read at all, then read in a drowsie and
cursorie manner: Nihil est tam utile, quod in transitu prosit: ’There is nothing so
profitable, that being lightly past over, will do good.’ If to take bookes in hand were to
learne them, and if to see were to view them, and if to run them over were to seize upon
them, I should be too blame, to make my self altogether so ignorant as I say. Since I
cannot stay the reader’s attention by the weight, Manco male, if I happen to stay him by
my intricate confusion; indeed, but he will afterward repent that ever he amused himself
about it. You say true, but he shall have amused himself upon it. And there be humors
to whom understanding causeth disdaine, who because they shall not know what I meane
will esteeme me the better, and will conclude the mystery and depth of my sense by the
obscuritie, Which, to speak in good earnest, I hate as death, and would shunne it if I
could avoid my self. Aristotle vaunteth in some place to affect the same. A vicious
affectation. Forasmuch as the often breaking of my chapters, I so much used in the
beginning of my book, seemed to interrupt attention before it be conceived, Disdaining
for so little a while to collect and there seat itself; I have betaken my self to frame them
longer, as requiring proposition and assigned leisure. In such an occupation he to whom
you will not grant one hour, you will allow him nothing; And you do nought for him for
whom you do, but in doing some other thing. Sithence perhaps I am particularly
tied and precisely vowed to speak by halves, to speak confusedly, to speak
discrepantly; I therefore hate this trouble-feast reason, and these extravagant projects,
which so much molest man’s life, and these so subtle opinions, if they have any truth; I
deem it over-dear, and find it too incommodious. On the other side, I labor to set forth
vanity and make sottishnesse to prevaile, if it bring me any pleasure; And without so
nicely controlling them, I follow my own natural inclinations. I have elsewhere seen
some houses ruined, statues overthrowne, both of heaven and of earth; But men be alwaies
one. All that is true; and yet I can not so often survay the vast toombe of that City, so
great, so populous, and so puissant, but I as often admire and reverence the same. The
care and remembrance of evills is recommended unto us. Now have I from my infancie
been bred and brought up with these; I have had knowledge of the affairs of Rome, long
time before I had notice of those of my house. I knewthe Capitoll and its platforme, before
I knew Louvre, the pallace of our Kings in Paris; and the River Tiber before Seyne. I have
more remembred and thought upon the fortunes and conditions of Lucullus, Metellus and
Scipio, then of any of our country-men. They are deceased, and so is my father as fully as
they; and is as distant from me and life in eighteene yeeres as they were in sixteene

hundred; Whose memory, amitie, and societie I notwithstanding omit not to continue, to
embrace and converse withall, with a perfect and most lively union. Yea, of my own
inclination I am more officious toward the deceased. They can no longer helpe them-
selves, but (as me seemetlh they require so much the more my ayde, There is Gratitude,
and there appeareth she in her perfect lustre. A benefit is less richly assigned where
retrogradation and reflexion is. Arcesilaus, going to visit Ctesibius that was sicke, and
finding him in very poore plight, fair and softly thrust some money under his boulster,
which he gave him; And concealing it from him, left and gave him also a quittance for
ever being beholding to him. Such have at any time deserved friendship or love thanks at
my hands, never lost in the same by being no longer with me. I have better paid and more
careful rewarded them, being absent and when they least thought of it. I speak more
kindely and affectionately of my friends when there is least means that ever it shall come
to their ears. I have heretofore undergone a hundred quarrels for the defense of Pompey
and Brutus his cause. This acquaintance continueth to this day betweene us. Even of
present things we have no other holde but by our fantazie. Perceiving my self unfit and
unprofitable for this age, I cast my self to that other, and am so besotted with it that the
state of the said ancient, free, just and florishing Rome (for I neither love the birth nor like
the old age of the same), does interest, concerne and passionate me. And therefore can I
not so often looke into the situation of their streets and houses, and those wondrous
strange ruines, that may be said to reach down to the Antipodes, but so often must I
ammuse my self on them. Is it nature or by the error of fantasie, that the seeing of places
we know to have been frequented or inhabited by men, whose memory is esteemed or
mentioned in stories, does in some sort move and stir us up as much or more than the
hearing of their noble deeds, or reading of their compositions? Tanta vis admonitionis
inest in locis: Et id quidem in hoc urbe infinitum; quacunque enim ingredimur, in aliquam
historiam vestigium ponimus: (Cic. s. De Fin.) ’So great a power of admonition is in the
very place. And that in this City is most infinite, for which way soever we walke, we set
our foote upon some History.’ I am much delighted with the consideration of their
countenance, port and abilliments. I ruminate those glorious names betweene my teeth,
and make mine ears to ring with the sound of them. Ego illos veneror, et tantis
nominibus semper assurgo. ’I do reverence them, and at their names I do rise and make
curtesie.’ Of things but in some sort great, strange and admirable, I admire their common
parts. I could wish to see them walk and suppe together, and hear their discourses. It
were ingratitude to despise and impiety to neglect the reliques or images of so many
excellent, honest good men, and therewithall so valiant, which I have seen live and die;
And who by their examples, had we the wit or grace to follow them, affoord us so many
notable instructions. And Rome as it stands now deserveth to be loved, Confederated so
long since and sharing titles with our Crowne of France, Being the only common and
universall City: The Soveraigne Magistrate therein commanding is likewise known
abroad in diverse other places. It is the chief Metropolitan City of all Christian nations;
both French and Spaniards, and all men else, are there at home. To be a Prince of that
state, a man needs but be of Christendome, where ever it be seated. There’s no place here
on earth that the Heavens have embraced with such influence of favors and grace, and

with such constancy; Even her ruine is glorious with renown, and swolne with glory.
Laudandis preciosior ruinis.
Ev’n made more honorable,
By ruines memorable.
Low-levelled as she lieth, and even in the tombe of her glory, she yet reserveth the
lively image and regardfull markes of Empire. Ut palam sit uno in loco gaudentis opus
esse naturæ: ’So as it is clear, in one place is set-forth the work of nature in her jollity.’
Some one would blame himself, indeed mutiny, to feel himself tickled with so vain
a pleasure. Our humors are not overvaine that be pleasant. Whatsoever they be that
constantly content a man capable of common understanding, I could not find in my heart
to moan or pity him. I am much beholding to fortune, inasmuch as until this day she
has committed nothing outrageously against me, or imposed any thing upon me that is
beyond my strength, or that I could not well bear. Is it not perhaps her custom to suffer
such as are not importunate or over busie with her to live in peace?
Quanto quisque sibi plura negaverit,
A Diis plura feret, nil cupientium
Nudus castra peto, multa petentibus
Desunt multa. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. xvi. 21, 42.
The more that men shall to themselves denie,
The more the gods will give them: threadbare I
Follow the campe of them that nought desire,
They still want much that still do much require.
If she continue so, I shall depart very well content and satisfied.
-----nihil supra,
Deos lacesso. -- Ibid. Car. ii. Od. xviii.11.
More than will serve, to have
Of Gods I do not crave.
But beware the shocke; Thousands miscary in the haven, and are cast away, being
neerest home. I am easily comforted with what shall happen here when I am gone. Things
present trouble me sufficiently, and set me thorowly a work.
Fortunæ cætera mando. -- Ovid. Metam. ii. 140.

The rest I do commit
To Fortune (as is fit).
Besides, I am not tied with that strong bond which some say bindes men to future times,
by the children bearing their names, and succeeding them in honors; And being so much
to be desired, it may be I shall wish for them so much the less. I am by myself but
overmuch tied unto the world and fastned unto life; I am pleased to be in Fortunes hold by
the circumstances properly necessary to my state, without enlarging her Jurisdiction upon
me by other ways; And I never thought that to be without children were a defect, able to
make mans life less compleat and less contented. A barren state or sterill vacation have
also their peculiar commodities. Children are in the number of things that need not greatly
be desired; especially in corrupted days, wherein it would be so hard a matter to make
them good. Bona jam nec nasci licet ita corrupta sunt semina: ’We cannot now have good
things so much as grow, the seeds are so corrupt.’ Yet have they just cause to moan
them, that, having once gotten, lose them untimely. He who left me my house in charge,
considering my humor, which was to stay at home so little, fore-saw I should be the
overthrow of it. He was deceived; I am now as I came unto it, if not somewhat better; and
that without any Office or Churchliving, which are no small helps. As for other matters, if
Fortune have offred me no violent or extraordinary offence, so has she not showed me
any great favor or extraordinary grace. Whatsoever I have belonging to it that may
properly be termed her gifts, was there before I came unto it; indeed, and a hundred yeeres
before. I particularly enjoy no essentiall good, or possesse no solid benefit, that I owe unto
her liberalitie. Indeed she has bestowed some wind-pufft favors upon me, which may
rather be termed titular and honorable in show, then in substance or materiall; and which,
in good truth, she has not granted, but offered me, God he knowes, to me, who am
altogether materiall; not satisfied but with realitie, which must also be massie and
substantiall; And who, if I durst confesse it, would not think avarice much less excusable
then ambition, nor grief less evitable then shame, nor health less desirable then
learning, or riches less to be wished then nobility. Amongst her vain favors I have
none does so much please my foolish self-pleasing conceit as an authentic Bull, charter or
patent of denizonship or borgeouship of Rome, which at my last being there, was granted
me by the whole Senate of that City--garish and trimly adorned with goodly Seales, and
written in fair golden letters--bestowed upon me with all gracious and free liberalitie.
And forasmuch as they are commonly conferred in diverse stiles more or lease favourable,
and that before I had ever seen any I would have been glad to have had but a paterne or
formular of one, I will for the satisfaction of any, if be fortune to be possessed with such a
curiosity as mine, here set down the true copy or transcript of it, and thus it is:--
Quod Horatius Maximus, Martius Cecius, Alexander Mutus,
almæ urbis conservatores de illustrissimo viro Michæle
Montano, Equite sancti Michælis, et a Cubiculo Regis
Christianissimi, Romana civitate donando, ad Senatum
retulerunt, S. P. Q. R. de ea re ita fieri censuit.

Cum veteri more et instituto cupide illi semper studioseque suscepti sint, qui
virtute ac nobilitate præstantes, magno Reipublicæ nostræ usui atque
ornamento fuissent, vel esse aliquando possent: Nos majorum nostrorum
exemplo atque auctoritate permoti, preclarum hanc Consuetudinem nobis
imitandam ac servandam fore censemus. Quamobrem cum Illustrissimus
Michæl Montanus Eques sancti Michælis, et cubiculo Regis Christianissimi;
Romani nominis studio sissimus, et familiæ laude atque splendore et
propriis virtutum meritis dignissimus sit, qui summo Senatus Populique
Romani judicio ac studio in Romanam Civitatem adsciscatur, placere
Senatui P. Q. R. Illustrissimum Michælem Montanum rebus omnibus
ornatissimum, atque huic inclyto Populo charissimum, ipsum posterosque
in Rom. civitatem adscribi, ornarique omnibus et premiis et honoribus,
quibus illi fruuntur, qui Cives patritiique Romani nati aout jure optimo facti
sunt. In quo censere Senatum P. Q. R. se non tam illi Jus Civitatis largiri
quam debitum tribuere, neque magis beneficium dare quam ab ipso
accipere, qui hoc Civitatis munere accipiendo, singular Civitatem ipsam
ornamento atque honore affecerit. Quam quidem S.C. auctoritatem iidem
Conservatores per Senatus P. Q. R. scribas in acta referri atque in Capitolii
curia servari, privilegiumque hujusmodi fieri, solitoque urbis sigillo
communiri, curarunt. Anno ab urbe condito CX C CCXXXI. post Christum
natum M.D.LxxxI.III. Idus Martii.
Horatius Fuscus sacri S. P. Q. R. scriba, Vincent.
Martholus sacri S.P. Q. R. scriba.
At the motion of Horatius Maximus, Martius Cecius, Alexander Mutus,
who are Conservators of this beautifull Cittie concerning the endenizing and
making cittizen of Rome the noble Gentleman Michæl de Montaigne,
Knight of the Order of Saint Michæll, and one of the Chamber of the most
Christian King, the Senate and people of Rome thought good thereof thus to
exact. Whereas by the ancient custom and good order, they have ever and
with good will been entertained, who excelling in virtue and nobility have
been, or at any time might be, of any great use or ornament unto our
common-weale: We, mooved by example and authority Of our
Auncesters, decree, That this notable custom by us should be ensued and
observed. Wherefore, sithence the right Noble Michæl de Montaigne,
Knight of Saint Michæls Order, and one of the Chamber of the most
Christian King, both is most affectionate unto the Roman name, and by the
commendations and splendor of his pedegree, as also by the merits of his
proper vertues, most worthe to be adopted and inserted into the Roman
Cittie with a speciall judgement and good will of the Senate and people of
Rome. It pleaseth the Senate and people of Rome that the right noble Michæl

de Montaigne, adorned in all complements and wellbeloved of this famous
Communaltie, both himself and his successours should be ascribed and
enfranchised into this Roman Cittie, and be graced with al rewards and
honors which they enjoy who either have been borne or elected either
Citizen or Noblemen of Rome. Wherein the Senate and people do decree
that they do not so much vouchsafe him the right of their City, as give him
that is due unto him, nor do they rather give him a benefite then receive it
of him, who by accepting this gift of the Cittie does countenance the Cittie
with a singular ornament and honor. Which Act and authority of the
Senates Decree the said Conservators caused by the Clearks of the Senate
and people to be registred and laid-up in the Capitoll Court, and this
Priviledge to be made and signed with the Cities usual Seale. In the yeare
since the building of the City CX C CCXXXI. after the birth of Christ a
thousand five hundred eighty and one: the Ides of March.
Horatius Fuscus, and Vincent Martholus,
Clarks of the Sacred Senate and people of Rome.
Being neither Burgeois nor Denizen of any City, I am well pleased to be so of the
noblest and greatest that ever was heretofore, or ever shall be hereafter. If others did so
attentively consider and survay themselves as I do, they shall, as I do, find themselves
full of inanitie, fondnesse, or vanity. I can not be rid of it, except I rid and quit my self.
We are all possessed and overwhelmed therewith, as well one as the other. But such as
have a feeling of it have somewhat the better bargaine; and yet I am not sure of it. This
common opinion and vulgar custom, to looke and marke elsewhere then on ourselves,
has well provided for our affairs. It is an object full-fraught with discontent, wherein we
see nothing, but misery and vanity. To the end we should not wholly be discomforted,
Nature has very fitly cast the action of our sight outward; We go forward according to
the streamer but to turn our course backe to ourselves is a painefull motion; the sea
likewise is troubled, raging and disquieted when t’is turned and driven into itself.
Observe (says every one) the motions and bransles of the heavens: take a survay of all -
the quarrell of this man, the pulse of that man, and anothers last testament: to conclude,
behold and marke ever, high or low, right or oblique, before or behind you. It was a
paradoxall commandement which the God of Delphos laid heeretofore upon us; saying,
’View yourselves within, know yourselves and keep you to yourselves.’ Your mind and
your will, which elsewhere is consumed, bring it unto itself again: you scatter, you
stragle, you stray, and you distract yourselves; call yourselves home again; rowze and
uphold yourselves; you are betrayed, you are spoiled and dissipated; yourselves are
stolen and taken from yourselves. Seest you not how all this universe holdeth all his
sights compelled inward, and his eyes open to contemplate itself? Both inward and
outward it is ever vanity for you; but so much less vanity by how much less it is
extended. Except your self, Oh man (said that God) every thing does first seek and study
itself, and according to it’s neede has limits to her travells and bounds to her desires.

There’s not one so shallow, so empty, and so needy as you are who embracest the whole
world. Thou art the Scrutator without knowledge the magistrate without jurisdiction, and
when all is done, the vice of the play.



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER X: HOW ONE OUGHT TO GOVERNE HIS WILL.






CHAPTER X: HOW ONE OUGHT TO GOVERNE HIS WILL.
N REGARD of the common sort of men, few things touch me, or (to
speak properly) sway me; for it is reason they touch, so they possesse-
us not. I have great neede, both by study and discourse, to encrease this
priviledge of insensibility, which is naturally crept far into me. I am
not wedded unto many things, and by consequence not passionate of
them. I have my sight clear, but tied to few objects; My senses delicate
and gentle, but my apprehension and application hard and dull. I engage my self with
difficulty. As much as I can I employ my self wholly to my self. And in this very
subject I would willingly bridle and uphold my affection, lest it be too far plunged
therein; Seeing it is a Subject I possesse at the mercy of others, and over which fortune
has more interest then my self. So as even in my health, which I so much esteeme, it
were requisite not to desire, nor so carefully to seek it, as thereby I might light upon
intollerable diseases. We must moderate ourselves betwixt the hate of pain and the love
of pleasure. Plato sets down a meane course of life betweene both. But to affections that
distract me from my self, and divert me elsewhere, surely to such I oppose my self with
all my force. Mine opinion is, that one should lend himself to others, and not give
himself but to himself. Were my wil easy to engage or apply itself, I could not

continue: I am over tender both by nature and custom,
Fugax rerum, securaque in otia natus. -- OVID. Trist. 1 iii. Eleg. ii. 9.
Avoiding active business,
And borne to secure idlenesse.
Contested and obstinate debates, which in the end would give mine adversarie advantage,
the issue which would make my earnest pursuit ashamed, would perchance torment me
cruelly. If I vexed as other men, my soul should never have strength to bear the alaroms
and emotions that follow such as embrace much. She would presently be displaced by this
intestine agitation. If at any time I have been urged to the managing of strange affairs, I
have promised to undertake them with my hand, but not with my lungs and liver; to
charge, and not to incorporate them into me, to have a care, but nothing at all to be
overpassionate of them: I looke to them, but I hatch them not. I work enough to dispose
and direct the domesticall troubles within my own entrailes and veines, without
harbouring, or importune my self with any forraine employments; and am sufficiently
interessed with my proper, natural and essentiall affairs, without seeking others
businesses. Such as know how much they owe to themselves, and how many offices of
their own they are bound to performe, shall find that nature has given them this
commission fully ample and nothing idle. Thou hast business enough within your self,
therefore stray not abroad; Men give themselves to hire. Their faculties are not their own,
but theirs to whom they subject themselves; their inmates, and not themselves, are within
them. This common humor does not please me. We should thriftily husband our mindes
liberty, and never engage it but upon just occasions, which if we judge impartially, are
very few in number. Looke on such as suffer themselves to be transported and swayed,
they do it every where; in little as well as in great matters, to that which concerneth as
easy as to that which toucheth them not. They thrust themselves indifferently into all
actions, and are without life if without tumultuary agitation. In negotiis sunt negotii causa:
’They are busie that they may not be idle, or else in action for actions sake.’ They seek
work but to be working. It is not so much because they will go, as for that they cannot
stand still - much like to a rowling stone, which never stayes until it come to a lying
place. To some men employment is a marke of sufficiencie and a badge of dignity. Their
spirits seek rest in action, as infants repose in the cradle. They may be said to be as
serviceable to their friends as importunate to themselves, No man distributes his mony to
others, but every one his life and time. We are not so prodigall of any thing as of those
whereof to be covetous would be both commendable and profitable for us. I follow a
cleane contrary course; I am of another complexion; I stay at home and looke to my self.
What I wish for I commonly desire the same but mildely, and desire but little; so likewise
I seldom employ and quietly embusie my self. Whatever they intend and act they do it
with all their will and vehemency. There are so many dangerous steps, that for the more
security we must somewhat slightly and superficially slide through the world, and not
force it. Pleasure itself is painefull in its height.

------ incedis per ignes,
Sub positos cineri deloso. -- HOR. Car. 1. ii. Od. i. 7.
You pass through fire (though unfraid)
Under deceitfull ashes laid.
The town counsell of Bourdeaux chose me Maior of their City, being far from France,
but further from any such thought. I excused my self, and would have avoided it; but
they told me I was to blame, the more because the Kings commandement was also
employed therein. It is a charge should seem so much the more goodly because it has
neither fee nor reward other than the honor in the execution. It lasteth two years, but
may continue longer by a second election, which seldom happens. To me it was, and
never had been but twice before: some years past the Lord of Lansac, and lately to the
Lord of Biron, Marshall of France, in whose place I succeeded, and left mine to the Lord
of Matigon, likewise Marshall of France, glorious by so noble an assistance.
Uterque bonus pacis bellique minister.
Both, both in peace and war,
Right serviceable are.
Fortune would have a share in my promotion by this particular circumstance which she
of her own added thereunto, not altogether vain; for Alexander disdained the Corinthian
Ambassadors who offred him the freedome and Burgeoise of their City, but when they
told him that Bacchus and Hercules were likewise in their registers he kindly thanked
them and accepted their offer. At my first arrivall I faithfully deciphered and
conscientiously displaied my self such as I am indeede, without memory, without
diligence, without experience and without sufficiencie; so likewise without hatred,
without ambition, covetousnesse and without violence; that so they might be duly
instructed what service they might or hope or expect at my hands. And forasmuch as the
knowledge they had of my deceased father, and the honor they bare unto his memory,
had mooved them to chuse me to that dignitie, I told them plainly I should be very sorie
that any man should work such an opinion in my will as their affairs and City had done
in my fathers, while he held the said government, whereunto they had called me. I
remembred to have seen him, being an infant and he an old man, his mind cruelly
turmoiled with the public toile, forgetting the sweet aire of his own house, whereunto
the weakenes of his age had long before tied him, neglecting the care of his health and
family, in a manner despising his life, which as one engaged for them, he much
endangered, riding long and painefull journies for them. Such a one was he, which humor
proceeded from the bountie and goodnesse of his nature. Never was mind more
charitable or more popular. This course, which I commend in others, I love not to follow.

Neither am I without excuse. He had heard that a man must forget himself for his
neighbour; that in respect of the general, the particular was not to be regarded. Most of
the worlds-rules and precepts hold this traine, to drive us out of ourselves into the wide
world, to the use of public societie. They presumed to work a goodly effect in
distracting and withdrawing us from ourselves, supposing we were by a natural Instinct
too-too much tied unto it: and to this end have not spared to say any thing. For to the wise
it is no novelty to reach things as they serve, and not as they are. Truth has her lets,
discommodities and incomparabilities with us. We must not often deceive others, lest we
beguile ourselves; and seele our eyes, and dull our understanding, thereby to repair and
amend them. Imperiti enim judicant, et qui frequenter in hoc ipsum fallendi sunt, ne
errent: ’For unskilfull men judge, who must often even therefore be deceived, lest they erre
and be deceived.’ When they prescribe us, to love three, foure, indeed fifty degrees of things
before ourselves, they present us with the Arte of shooters, who to come near the marke
take their aime far above the same. To make a crooked sticke straight, we bend it the
contrary way. I suppose that in the [temple] of Pallas, as we see in all other religions, they
had some apparant mysteries, of which they made show to all the people, and others more
high and secret, to be imparted only to such as were professed. It is likely that the true
point of friendship, which every man oweth to himself, is to be found in these. Not a
false amitie, which makes us embrace glory, knowledge, riches, and such like, with a
principal and immoderate affection, as members of our being; nor an effeminate and
indiscreet friendship, Wherein happens as to the Ivie, which corrupts and ruines the wals it
claspeth; But a sound and regular amity, equally profitable and Pleasant. Who so
understandeth all her duties and exerciseth them, he is rightly endenized in the Muses
cabinet; He has attained the type of humane Wisedome and the perfection of our
happinesse. This man, knowing exactly what he oweth to himself, findeth that he ought
to employ the use of other men and of the world unto himself; which to performe, he
must contribute the duties and offices that concerne him unto public societie. He that
lives not somewhat to others, liveth little to himself. Qui sibi amicus est, scito hune
amicum omnibus esse: (Sen. Epist. vi. f.) ’He that is friend to himself, know, he is friend
to all.’ The principal charge we have is every man his particular conduct. And for this
only we live here. As he that should forget to live well and religiously; and by
instructing and directing others should think himself acquitted of his duty, would be
deemed a foole; Even so, who forsaketh to live healthy and merrily himself, therwith to
serve another, in mine opinion taketh a bad and unnaturall course. I will not that in any
charge one shall take in hand he refuse or think much of his attention, of his labor, of
his steps, of his speech, of his sweat, and if need be of his blood.
-----non ipse pro charis amicis,
Aut patria timidus perire. -- Hor. Car. iv. Od. ix. 51.
Not fearing life to end
For Country or dear friend.

But it is only borrowed and accidentally, the mind remaining ever quiet and in health,
not without action, but without vexation or passion; simply to moove or be dooing costs it
so little that even sleeping it is mooving and dooing; but it must have its motion with
discretion, for the body receiveth the charges imposed on him, justly as they are; But the
spirit extendeth them, and often to his hinderance makes them heavy, giving them what
measure it pleaseth. Like things are effected by diverse efforts and different contentions of
will; the one may go without the other, for how many men do dayly hazard themselves
in war which they regard not, and press into the danger of the battells, the loss
whereof shall no whit breake their next sleepe? Whereas some man in his own house, free
from this danger, which he durst not so much as have looked towards it, is for the wars
issue more passionate, and therewith has his mind more perplexed than the souldier that
therin employeth his blood and life. I know how to deal in public charges without
departing from my self. This sharpnesse and violence of desires hindreth more then
steade the conduct of what we undertake, filling us with impatience to the events, either
contrary or slow, and with bitternesse and jealousie toward those with whom we negotiate.
We never governe that thing well wherewith we are possessed and directed.
------Male cuncta ministrat
Impetus.
Fury and haste do lay all waste,
Misplacing all, disgracing all.
He who therein employeth but his judgement and direction, proceeds more cheerfully, he
faines, he yields, he deferres at his pleasure according to the occasions of necessity; he
failes of his attempt without torment or affliction, ready and prepared for a new enterprise.
He marcheth alwaies with the reines in his hand. He that is besotted with this violent and
tyrannical intention does necessarily declare much indiscretion and injustice. The
violence of his desire transports him. They are rash motions, and if fortune helpe not
much, of little fruit. Philosophie wills us to banish choller in the punishment of offences;
not to the end revenge should be more moderate but contrary, more weighty and surely set
on; wherunto this violence seems to be a let. Choller does not only trouble, but
wearieth the executioners arms. This passionate heat dulleth and consumes their force.
As in too much speede, festinatio tarda est: ’Hastinesse is slow.’ Haste makes waste, and
hinders and stayes itself: ipsa se velocitas implicat: ’Swiftnesse entangles itself.’ As for
example, according as by ordinary custom I perceive, covetousnesse has no greater let
then itself. The more violent and extended it is, the less effectuall and fruitfull.
Commonly it gathers wealth more speedily, being masked with a show of liberality. A
very honest Gentleman and my good friend was likely to have endangered the health of
his body by an over passionate attention and earnest affection to the affairs of a Prince,
who was his Maister. Which Maister has thus described himself unto me: That as
another, he discerneth and has a feeling of the burden of accidents; but such as have no
remedie, he presently resolveth to suffer with patience. For the rest, after he has

appointed necessary provisions, which by the vivacitie and nimblenesse of his with he
speedily effects, he then attends the event with quietnesse. Verily, I have seen in him at
one instant a great carelesnesse and liberty, both in his actions and countenance, even in
important and difficult affairs. I find him more magnanimous and capable in bad then in
good fortune. His losses are to him more glorious than his victories, and his mourning
than his triumphs. Consider how in meere vain and frivolous actions, as at chesse, tennis
and such like sports, this earnest and violent engaging with an ambicious desire to winne,
does presently call both mind and limbs into disorder and indiscretion. Wherein a man
does both dazle his sight and distemper his whole body. He who demeaneth himself
with most moderation both in winning and loosing is ever neerest unto himself, and has
his wits best about him. The less he is moved or passionate in play, the more safely does
be governe the same, and to his greater advantage. We hinder the minds seazure and
holdfast by giving her so many things to seize upon. Some we should only present unto
her, others fasten upon her, and others incorporate into her. Shee may see and feel all
things, but must only feede on herself: And be instructed in that which properly
concerneth her, and which meerely belongeth to her essence and substance. The laws of
nature teach us what is just and fit for us. After the wise-men have told us, that according
to nature no man is indigent or wanteth, and that each one is poore but in his own
opinion, they also distinguish subtilly the desires proceeding from nature, from such as
grow from the disorders of our fantasie. Those whose end may be discerned are meerely
hirs; and such as flie before us, and whose end we cannot attaine, are properly ours. Want
of goods may easily be cured, but the poverty of the mind is incurable.
Nam si, quod satis est homini, id satis esse potesset,
Hoc sat erat, nunc, quum hoc non est, qui credimus porro
Divitias ullas animum mi explere potesse?
If it might be enough, that is enough for man,
This were enough, since it is not, how think we can
Now any riches fill
My mind and greedy will?
Socrates seeing great store of riches, jewells, and pretious stuffe, carried in pompe
through the City: Oh how many things (quoth he) do not I desire! Metrodorus lived daily
with the weight of twelve ounces of foode; Epicurus with less; Metrocles in winter lay
with sheepe, and in summer in the Cloisters of Churches. Sufficit ad id natura, quod
poscit: (Sen. Epist. xc.) ’Nature is sufficient for that which it requires.’Cleanthes lived by
his hands, and boasted that if Cleanthes would, he could nourish another Cleanthes. If that
which nature does exactly and originally require at our handes for the preservation of our
being, is over little (as in truth what it is, and how good cheape our life may be
maintained, cannot better be known or expressed than by consideration that it is so little,
and for the smalnesse thereof, it is out of Fortunes reach, and she can take no hold of it) let
us dispense something els unto ourselves and call the custom and condition of every-one

of us by the name of Nature. Let us taxe and stint and feede ourselves according to that
measure; let us extend both our appurtenances and reckonings thereunto. For so far, me
seems, we have some excuse. Custome is a second Nature, and no less powerfull. What
is wanting to custom, I hold it a defect; and I had well nigh as leefe one should deprive
me of my life, as refraine or much abridge me of my state wherein I have lived so long. I
am no more upon termes of any great alteration nor to thrust my self into a new and
unusuall course, no not toward augmentation; it is no longer time to become other or be
transformed; and as I should complain if any great adventure should now befall me, and
grieve it came not in time that I might have enjoyed the same.
Quo mihi fortuna, si non conceditur uti? -- HOR. i. Epist. v.
12.
Whereto should I have much,
If I to use it grutch?
I should likewise be grieved at any inward purchase. I were better in a manner never,
than so late, to become an honest man, and well practised to live when one has no longer
life. I who am ready to depart this World could easily be induced to resigne the share of
wisdom I have learn’t concerning the World’s commerce, to any other man new-come
into the world. It is even as good as Mustard after dinner. What neede have I of that good
which I cannot enjoy? Whereto serveth knowledge if one have no head? It is an injury and
disgrace of Fortune to offer us those presents, which forasmuch as they faile us when we
should most neede them, fill us with a just spite. Guide me no more; I can go no longer.
Of so many dismembrings that Sufficiency has, patience sufficeth us. Give the capacity
of an excellent treble to a Singer that has his lungs rotten, and of eloquence to a hermit
confined into the Deserts of Arabia. There needs no Arte to further a fall. The end findes it
self in the finishing of every work. My world is at an end, my form is expired. I am
wholly of the time past, and am bound to authorize the same, and thereto conforme my
issue. I will say this by way of example, that the eclipsing or abridging of tenne dayes,
which the Pope has lately caused, has taken me so low that I can hardly recover my
self. I follow the years wherein we were wont to compt otherwise; so long and ancient a
custom does challenge and recall me to it again, I am thereby enforced to be somewhat
an hereticke, Incapable of innovation though corrective. My imagination mauger my teeth
runnes still tenne dayes before or tenne behinde, and whispers in mine ears: This rule
toucheth those which are to come. If health itself, so sweetly pleasing, comes to me but
by fittes, it is rather to give me cause of grief then possession of itself; I have no where
left me to retire it. Time forsakes me, without which nothing is enjoyed. How small
accompt should I make of these great elective dignities I see in the world, and which are
only given to men ready to leave the world, wherein they regard not so much how duely
they shall discharge them, as how little they shall exercise them, from the beginning they
looke to the end. To conclude, I am ready to finish this man, not to make another. By long

custom this form is changed into substance and Fortune into Nature. I say, therefore,
that amongst us feeble creatures, each one is excusable to compt that his own, which is
comprehended under measure. And yet all beyond these limits is nothing but confusion.
It is the largest extension we can grant our rights. The more we amplifie our neede and
possession, the more we engage ourselves to the crosses of fortune and adversities. The
cariere of our desires must be circumscribed, and tied to strict bounds of neerest and
contiguous commodities. Moreover, their course should be managed, not in a straight line
having another end, but round, whose two points hold together, and end in ourselves with
a short compasse. The actions governed without this reflection, I meane a near and
essentiall reflection, as those of the covetous, of the ambitious, and so many others, that
run directly point-blancke, the course of which carrieth them away before them, are
erroneous and crazed actions. Most of our vacations are like Playes. Mundus universus
exercet histrioniam: ’All the world does practise stage-playing.’ We must play our parts
duly, but as the part of a borrowed personage. Of a visard and apparance we should not
make a reall essence, nor proper of that which is another. We cannot distinguish the
skinne from the shirt; it is sufficient to disguise the face without deforming the breast. I
see some transforme and transubstantiate themselves into as many new formes and strange
beings as they undertake charges; and who emprelate themselves even to the heart and
entrailes; and entraine their offices, even sitting on their close stoole. I cannot teach them
to distinguish the salutations and cappings of such as regard them, from those that respect
either their office, their traine, or their mule. Tantum se fortunæ permittunt, etiam ut
naturam dediscant: ’They give themselves so much over to Fortune, as they forget Nature.’
They swell in mind and puffe up their natural discourse according to the dignity of their
office. The Maior of Bourdeaux, and Michæl, Lord of Montaigne, have ever been two, by
an evident separation. To be an advocate or a Treasurer one should not be ignorant of the
craft incident to such callings. An honest man is not comptable for the vice and folly of
his trade, and therefore ought not to refuse the exercise of it. It is the custom of his
country, and there is profit in it. We must live by the World, and such as we find it, so
make use of it. But the judgement of an Emperor should be above his Empire, and to see
and consider the same as a strange accident. He should know how to enjoy himself apart,
and communicate himself as James and Peter, at least to himself, I cannot so absolutely
or so deepely engage my self. When my wil gives me to any party, it is not with so
violent a bond that my understanding is thereby infected. In the present intestine trouble of
our State my interest has not made me forget neither the commendable qualities of our
adversaries, nor the reproachfull of those I have followed. They partiall extoll whatever is
on their side; I do not so much as excuse the greater number of my friends actions. A
good Oratour loses not his grace by pleading against me. The intricatenesse of our debate
remooved, I have maintained my self in equanimity and pure indifferency. Neque extra
necessitates belli, præcipuum odium gero: ’Nor bear I capital hatred when I am out of
the necessitie of war.’ Wherein I glory, for that commonly I see men erre in the contrary.
Such as extend their choller and hatred beyond their affairs (as most men do) show that
it proceedes elsewhence, and from some private cause; even as one being cured of an
ulcer, and his fever remaineth still, declareth it had another more hidden beginning. It is

the reason they bear none unto the cause in general, and forasmuch as it concerneth the
interest of all and of the state; But they are vexed at it, only for this, that it toucheth them
in private. And therefore are they distempered with a particular passion, both beyond
justice and public reason. Non tam omnia universi, quam ea, quæ ad quemque pertinent,
singuli carpebant: ’All did not so much find fault with all, as every one with those that
appertained to every one.’ I will have the advantage to be for us, which though it be not I
enrage not, I stand firmely to the sounder parts. But I affect not to be noted a private
enemy to others, and beyond general reason I greatly accuse this vicious form of
obstinate contesting. He is of the League because he admireth the grace of the Duke of
Guise; or he is a Hugonote, forasmuch as the King of Navarres activitie amazeth him. He
finds fault in the Kings behaviours, therefore he is sedicious in his heart. I would not give
the magistrate my voice that he had reason to condemne a book, because an hereticke
was therein named and extolled to be one of the best Poets of this age. Dare we not say
that a theefe has a good leg if behave so indeed? If she be a strumpet, must she needs
have a stinking breath? In wiser ages revoked they the proud title of Capitolinus they had
formerly given to Marcus Manlius as the preserver of religion and public liberty?
Suppressed they the memory of his liberalitie, his deeds of arms and military rewards
granted to his vertues, because to the prejudice of his countries laws he afterwards
affected a Royalty? If they once conceive an hatred against an Orator or an advocate, the
next day he becomes barbarous and uneloquent. I have elsewhere discoursed of zeale
which has driven good men into like errours. For my self I can say, that he does
wickedly, and this vertuously. Likewise, in prognostickes or sinister events of affairs,
they will have every man blinde or dull in his own cause, and that our persuasion and
judgement serve not the truth but the project of our desires. I should rather erre in the
other extremity? So much I fear my desire might corrupt me. Considering I somewhat
tenderly distrust my self in things I most desire. I have in my dayes seen wonders in the
indiscreet and prodigious facilitie of people, suffering their hopes and beliefes to be led
and governed as it has pleased and best fitted their leaders, above a hundred discontents,
one in the necke of another, and beyond their fantasies and dreames. I wonder no more at
those whom the apish toyes of Apollonius and Mahomet have seduced and blinded. Their
sense and understanding is wholly smothered in their passion. Their discretion has no
other choise but what pleaseth them and furthereth their cause. Which I had especially
observed in the beginning of our distempered factions and factious troubles. This other
which is grown since by imitation surmounteth the same. Whereby I observe that it is an
inseparable quality of popular errours. The first beeing gone, opinions entershocke one
another, following the winde as waves do. They are no members of the body, if they may
renounce it, if they folow not the common course. But truely they wrong the just parts
when they seek to helpe them with fraude or deceipts. I have alwaies contracted the
same. This meane is but for sicke braines; the healthy have surer and honester ways to
maintaine their resolutions and excuse all contrary accidents. The Heavens never saw so
weighty a discord and so harmefull a hatred as that betweene Cæsar and Pompey, nor ever
shall hereafter. Mee seems, notwithstanding I see in those noble and Heroicall mindes
an exemplar and great moderation of the one toward the other. It was a jelousie of honor

and emulation of command which transported them, not to a furious and indiscreete
hatred, without malice or detraction. In their sharpest exploites I discover some reliques of
respect and cinders of well-meaning affection. And I imagine that had it been possible
either of them desired rather to effect his purpose without overthrowing his competitour
than by working his utter ruine. Note how contrary the proceeding was betweene Sylla and
Marius. We must not run headlong after our affections and private interests. As in my
youth I ever opposed my self to the motions of love, which I felt to usurpe upon me, and
laboured to diminish its delights, lest in the end it might vanquish and captivate me to his
mercy; So do I now in all other occasions which my will apprehendeth with an over great
appetite. I bend to the contrary of my disposition as I see the same plunged and drunke
with its own Wine. I shunne so far foorth to nourish her pleasure as I may not revoke it
without a bloody loss. Those mindes which through stupidity see things but by halves
enjoy this happinesse, that such as be hurtful offend them least. It is a spirituall leprosie
that has some show of health, and such a health as Philosophy does not altogether
contemne. But yet it may not lawfully be termed wisdom, as we often do. And after
this manner did in former times some body mocke Diogenes, who, in the dead of Winter,
went all naked, embracing an image of Snow to try his patience, who, meeting him in this
order, said thus unto him: ’Art you now very colde?’ ’Nothing, at all,’ answered Diogenes.
’What thinkest you to do then that is either hard or exemplar by standing in the colde?’
replied the other. ’To measure constancy we must necessarily know sufferance.’ But such
minds as must behold crosse events and fortunes injuries in their height and sharpnesse,
which must weigh and taste them according to their natural bitternesse and charge, let
them employ their skil and keep themselves from embracing the causes and divert their
approaches. What did King Cotys? He payed liberally for that godly and rich Vessell
which one had presented unto him, but forasmuch as it was exceeding brittle he presently
broke it himself, that so betimes he might remoove so easy an occasion of choller against
his servants. I have in like sort shunned confusion in my affairs, and sought not to have
my goods contiguous to my neighbors, and to such as I am to be linked in strict
friendshippe, Whence commonly ensue causes of alienation and unkindnesse. I have
heretofore loved the hazardous play of Cardes and Dice. I have long since left it; only for
this, that notwithstanding any fair semblance I made in my losses I was inwardly
disquieted. Let a man of honor, who is to take a lie or endure an outrageous wrong, and
cannot admit a bad excuse for paiment or satisfaction, avoid the progresse of contentious
altercations. I shunne melancholike complexions and froward men, as infected. And in
matters I cannot talk of without interest and emotion, I meddle not with them, except
duty constraine me thereunto. Melius non incipient quam desinent: ’They shall better not
beginne than leave off.’ The surest way is then to prepare ourselves before occasion. I
know that some wisemen have taken another course, and have not feared to engage and
vehemently to insinuate themselves into diverse objects. Those assure themselves of their
own strength, under which they shrowd themselves against all manner of contrary events,
making mischiefes to wrestle one against another by vigor and virtue of patience:
Velut rupes vastum quæ prodit in æquor,

Obvia ventorum furiis, expostaque ponto.
Vim cunct am atque minas perfert cælique marisque,
. . . ipsa immota manens. -- VIRG. Æn. 1. x. 693.
Much like a rocke, which buts into the Maine,
Meeting with winds-rage, to the Sea laid plaine,
It does the force of skies and Seas sustain,
Endure their threats, yet does uumoov’d remaine.
Let us not imitate these examples; we shall not attaine them. They opinionate
themselves resolutely to behold, and without perturbation to be spectatours of their
Countries ruine, which whilome possessed and commaunded their full will. As for our
vulgar mindes, therein is too much effort and roughnesse. Cato quit thereby the noblest
life that ever was. We seely ones must seek to escape the storme further off: We ought
to provide for apprehension and not for patience, and avoid the blowes we cannot
withstand. Zeno seeing Chremonides, a young man whom he loved, approach to sit near
him, rose up sodainly. Cleanthes asking him the reason? I understand (says he) that
physicians above all things prescribe rest, and forbid emotion in all humors. Socrates says
not: Yeeld not to the allurements of beauty; maintaine it, enforce ourselves to the
contrary. Shunne her (says he), run out of her sight and company, as from a violent
poison that infecteth and stingeth far-off. And his good Disciple, faining or reciting, but
in mine opinion rather reciting then faining, the matchles perfections of the great Cyrus,
describeth him distrusting his forces to withstand the blandishments or allurings of the
divine beautie of that famous Panthea his Captive, committing the visitation and guarde
of her to an other, that had less liberty then himself. And likewise the Holy-Ghost says,
ne nos inducas in tentationem: (Matth. vi. 13.) ’and lead us not into temptation.’ We pray
not that our reason be not encountered, and vanquished by concupiscence, but that it be not
so much as assayed therewith; That we be not reduced to an estate, where we should but
suffer the approaches, sollicitations and temptations of sinne: and we entreat our Lord to
keep our conscience quiet, fully perfectly free from all commerce of evil. Such as say
they have reason for their revenging passion, or any other mind-troubling perturbation,
say often truth, as things are, but not as they were. They speak to us when the causes of
their error are by themselves fostred and advanced. But retire further backeward, recall
their causes to their beginning: there you surprise and put them to a non-plus. Would they
have their fault be less because it is more ancient; and that of an unjust beginning, the
progresse be just? He that (as I do) shall wish his countries well-fare, without fretting or
pining himself, shall be grieved, but not swoune, to see it threatning, either his own
downefall, or a continuance no less ruinous. Oh seely-weake barke, whom both waves,
winds and Pilot, hull and tosse to so contrary desseignes:
-----in tam diversa, magister,
Ventus et unda trahunt.

Maister the wave and winds
So diverse ways do binde.
Who gapes not after the favor of Princes, as after a thing without which he cannot
live, nor is much disquieted at the coldnes of their entertainment or frowning countenance,
nor regardeth the inconstancy of their will. Who hatcheth not his children or huggeth not
honors, with a slavish propension, nor leaves to live commodiously having once lost
them. Who does good namely for his own satisfaction, nor is much vexed to see men
censure of his actions against his merit. A quarter of an ownce of patience provideth for
such inconveniences. I find ease in this receit: redeeming my self in the beginning as
good cheape as I can, by which means I perceive my self to have escaped much trouble
and manifold difficulties. With very little force I stay these first motions of my
perturbations, And I abandon the subject which beginnes to molest me, and before it
transport me. He that stops not the loose, shall hardly stay the course. He that cannot
shut the doore against them shall never expell them being entered. He that cannot attaine
an end in the beginning, shall not come to an end of the conclusion; nor shall he endure
the fall that could not endure the starts of it. Etenim ipsæ se impellunt , ubi semel a
ratione discessum est, ipsague ibi imbecillitas indulget, in altumque provehitur
imprudens: nec resent locuni consistendi: (CIC. Tusc. Qu. iv.) ’For they drive themselves
headlong, when once they are parted and past reason, and weaknesse soothes itself, and
unawares is carried into the deepe, nor can it find a place to tarry in.’ I feel betimes the
low winds which are forerunners of the storme, buzze in mine ears and sound and trie
me within:
-----ceu flamina prima
Cum deprensa fremunt sylvis, et cæca volutant
Murmura, venturos nautis prodentia ventos. -- VIRG. Æn. 1. x. 97.
At first blasts in the woods perceiv’d to go,
Whistle, and darkely speak in murmurs low,
Foretelling Marriners what winds will grow.
How often have I done myself an apparent injustice to avoid the the danger I should fall
into by receiving the same, happily worse, from a world of troubles, and of foul and vile
practises, more enemies to my natural disposition t hen fire and torment? Convenit a
litibus quantum licet, et nescio an paulo plus etiam quam licet, abhorrentem esse; Est
enim non modo liberale, paululum nonnunquam de suo jure decedere, sed interdum etiam
fructuosum: (CIC. Off. i.) ’As much as we may, and it may be more then we may, we
should abborre brabling and lawing; for it is not only an ingenious part, but sometimes
profitable also at sometimes to yield a little of our right.’ If we were wise indeede, we
should rejoice and glory, as I heard once a yong-gentleman, borne of a very great house,
very wittily and unfainedly rejoice with all men that his mother had lost her sute; as if it

had been a cough, an ague, or any other yrksome burden. The favors which fortune
might have given me, as aliances and acquaintances with such as have Soveraigne
authority in those things, I have in my conscience done much instantly to evoide
employing them to others prejudice, and not over-value my rights above their worth. To
conclude, I have so much prevailed by my endeavors (in a good hour I may speak it)
that I am yet a virgin for any sutes in law which have notwithstanding not omitted gently
to offer me their service, and under pretence of lawfull titles insinuate themselves into my
allowance, would I but have given care unto them. And as a pure maiden from quarrels, I
have without important offence, either passive or active, lingred out a long life, and never
heard worse than my own name: A rare grace of heaven. Our greatest agitations have
strange springs and ridiculous causes. What ruine did our last Duke of Burgundy run
into for the quarrell of a cart-load of sheepes-skinnes? And was not the graving of a scale
the chief cause of the most horrible breach and topsie-turvey that ever this worlds-frame
endured? For Pompey and Cæsar are but the new buddings and continuation of two
others. And I have seen in my time the wisest heads of this realm assembled with great
ceremony and public charge about treaties and agreements, the true-deciding whereof
depended in the meane while absolutely and soveraignely of the will and consultations
held in some Ladies pate or cabinet, and of the inclination of some silly woman. Poets
have most judiciously looked into this, who but for an apple have set all Greece and Asia
on fire and sword. See why that man does hazard both his honor and life on the fortune
of his rapier and dagger; let him tell you whence the cause of that contention arises; he
can not without blushing, so vain and so frivolous is the occasion. To embarke him, there
needs but little advisement, but being once-in, all parts do work. There are greater
provisions required, more difficult and important. How far more easy is it not to enter
than to get forth? We must proceed contrary to the brier, which produces a long and
straight stalke at the first springing; but after, as tired and out of breath, it makes many and
thicke knots, as if they were pawses, shewing to have no more that vigor and constancy.
We should rather begin gentle and leasurely, and keep our strength and breath for the
perfection of the work. We direct affairs in the beginning, and hold them at our mercy,
but being once undertaken, they guide and transport us, and we must follow them. Yet
may it not be said that this counsell has freed me from all difficulties, and that I have not
been often troubled to controle and bridle my passions, which are not alwayes governed
according to the measure of occasions, whose entrances are often sharpe and violent. So is
it that thence may be reaped good fruit and profit, except for those who in well doing are
not satisfied with any benefit, if their reputation be in question. For in truth such an effect
is not compted of but by every one to himself. You are thereby better satisfied, but not
more esteemed, having reformed your self before you come into action or the matter was
in sight; yet not in this only, but in all other duties of life, their course which aime at
honor is diverse from that which they propound unto themselves that follow order and
reason. I find some that inconsiderately and furiously thrust themselves into the lists, and
grow slacke in the course. As Plutarke says, that ’Such as by the vice of bashfullnesse are
soft and tractable to grant whatsoever is demanded, are afterward as proxie and facile to
recant and breake their word.’ In like manner, he that enters lightly into a quarrel is

subject to leave it as lightly. The same difficulty which keepes me from embracing the
same should incite me, being once mooved and therein engaged, to continue resolute. It is
an ill custom. Being once embarked, one must either go on or sinke. ’Attempt
coldly’ (sayed Byas), ’but pursue hotly.’ For want of judgement our hearts faile us, Which
is also less tolerable. Most agreements of our modern quarrels are shamefull and false;
We only seek to save apparances and therewhilst betray and disavow our true
intentions. We salve the deede; We know how we spake it, and in what sence the by-
standers know it; indeed our friends to whom we would have our advantages known. It
is to the prejudice of our liberty and interest of our resolutions honor that we dis-avow
our thoughts and seek for starting holes in falshood to make our a greements. We bely
ourselves to salve a lie we have given to another. We must not looke whether your action
or word may admit another interpretation, but it is your own true and sincere construction
that you must now maintaine, whatsoever it cost you. It is to your virtue and to your
conscience that men speak; parts that ought not to be disguised. Leave we these base
courses, wrangling shifts and verball means, to pettyfogging Lawyers. The excuses and
reparations, or satisfactions, which dayly I see made, promised and given to purge
indiscretion, seem to me more foul than indiscretion itself; Better were it for one to
offend his adversary again, than in giving him such satisfaction to wrong himself so
much. You have braved him mooved by choller, and now you seek to pacify and flatter
him in your cold and better sense; Thus you abase yourselfe more than you were before
exalted. I find no speech so vicious in a Gentleman as I deem any recantation he shall
make, dishonorable, especially if it be wrested from him by authority; Forasmuch as
obstinacy is in him more excusable than cowardice. Passions are to me as easy to be
avoyded as they are difficult to be moderated. Excinduntur facilius animo, quam
temperantur: ’They are more easily rooted out of the mind than brought to good temper.’
He that cannot attaine to this noble Stoicall impassibility let him shrowd himself in the
bosome of this my popular stupidity. What they did by virtue I inure my self to do by
Nature. The middle region harboureth stormes; the two extreames containe Philosophers
and rurall men, they concurre in tranquility and good hap.
Felix qui potuit rerum coqnoscere causas,
Atque metus omnes et inexorabile fatum.
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari.
Fortunatus et ille, Deos qui novit agrestes,
Pandaque, Silvantimque senem, Nymphasque sorores. Virg. Georg. ii. 490.
Happy is he that could of things the causes find,
And subject to his feete all fearefulnesse of mind,
Inexorable fate, and noyse of greedy Hell.
And happy he, with Country Gods acquainted well,
Pan and old Sylvan knowes,
And all the sister shrowes.

The beginnings of all things are weake and tender. We must therefore be clear-sighted
in beginnings; For, as in their budding we discerne not the danger, so in their full growth
we perceive not the remedy. I should have encountered a thousand crosses, daily more hard
to be digested in the course of ambition, than it has bin uneasie for me to stay the natural
inclination that led me onto them.
----- jure perhorrui,
Late conspicuum tollere verticem. -- Hor. Car. iii. 16, 18.
I have been much afraid for causes right,
To raise my foretop far abroad to sight.
All public actions are subject to uncertaine and diverse interpretations: For, too many
heads judge of them. Some say of this my City-employment (whereof I am content to
speak a word, not that it deserves it, but to make a show of my manners in such things) I
have demeaned my self like one that is too slowely moved and with a languishing
affection; And they are not altogether void of reason. I strive to keep my mind and
thoughts quiet. Cum semper Natura, tum etiam ætate jam quietus: ’Both ever quiet by
Nature, and now because of yeeres.’ And if at any time they are debauched to some rude
and piercing impression it is in truth without my consent, from which natural slacknesse
one must not therefore inferre any proofe of disability; For, Want of care and lacke of
judgement are two things; And less unkindnesse and ingratitude toward those Citizens
who to gratifie me, employed the utmost of all the means they could possibly, both
before they knew me and since; And who did much more for me in appointing me my
charge the second time, then in choosing me the first. I love them with all my heart, and
wish them all the good that may be; And truly if occasion had been offered I wold have
spared nothing to have done them service. I have stirred and laboured for them as I do for
my self. They are good people, warlike and generous, yet capable of obedience and
discipline and fit for good employment, if they be well guided. They say likewise that I
passed over this charge of mine without any deede of note or great show. It is true.
Moreover, they accuse my cessation, when as all the world was convicted of too much
doing; I have a most nimble motion where my will does carry me. But this point is an
enemy unto perseverance. Whosoever will make use of me according to my self, let him
employ me in affairs that require vigor and liberty; that have a short, a straight, and
therewithall a hazardous course I may perhaps somewhat prevaile therein. Whereas
if it be tedious, crafty, laborious, artificiall and intricate, they shall do better to address
themselves to some other man. All charges of importance are not difficult. I was prepared
to labor somewhat more earnestly if there had been great neede. For it lyes in my power
to do something more than I make show of, and than I love to do. To my knowledge I
have not omitted any motion that duty required earnestly at my hands. I have easily
forgotten those which ambition blendeth with duty and cloketh with her title. It is they
which most commonly fill the eyes and ears and satisfie men. Not the thing itself, but,;
the apparance payeth them. If they hear no noise they imagine we sleepe. My humors

are contrary to turbulent humors; I could pacify an inconvenience or trouble without
troubling my self, and chastise a disorder without alteration.
Have I neede of choller and inflammation, I borrow it and therewith maske my self;
My maners are musty, rather wallowish then sharpe; I accuse not a Magistrate that
sleepeth so they that are under it sleepe also. So sleepe the laws. For my part I commend
a gliding, an obscure and reposed life. Neque submissam et abjectam, neque se
efferentem: (Cic. Off. i.) ’Neyther too abject and submissive, nor vaunting itself too much.’
But my fortune will have it so; I am descended of a family that has lived without noise
and tumult, and of long continuance particularly ambitious of integrity. Our men are so
framed to agitation and ostentations that goodnesse, moderation, equity, constancy, and
such quiet and meane qualities are no more heard of. Rough bodies are felt, smooth ones
are handled imperceptibly. Sickenesse is felt, health little or not at all; nor things that
annoint us, in regard of such as sting us. It is an action for ones reputation and private
commodity, and not for the common good, to refer that to be done in the market place
which a man may do in the counsel-chamber; and at noone day what might have been
effected the night before; and to be jealous to do that himself which his fellow can
performe as well. So did some Surgeons of Greece show the operations of their skill upon
scaffolds in view of all passengers, thereby to get more practise and custom. They
suppose that good orders cannot be understood but by the sound of a trumpet. Ambition is
no vice for petty companions, and for such endevours as ours. One said to Alexander:
’Your father will leave you a great commaund, easy and peacefull;’ the boy was envious
of his father’s victories and of the justice of his government. He would not have enjoyed
the world’s Empire securely and quietly. Alcibiades in Plato loves rather to die yong,
fair, rich, noble, learned, and all that in execellence, then to stay in the state of such a
condition. This infirmity is happily excusable in so strong and full a mind. When these
petty wretched soules are therewith enveagled, and think to publish their fame, because
they have judged a cause rightly, or continued the order in guarding of a Cities gates; by
how much more they hoped to raise their head, so much more do they show their
simplicity. This petty well-doing has neither body nor life. It vanisheth in the first
moneth, and walkes but from one corner of a street to another. Entertaine therewith your
son and your servant, and spare not. As that ancient fellow, who having no other auditor
of his praises and applauding of his sufficiency, boasted with his chambermaids,
exclaiming: ’Oh Perette! what a gallant and sufficient man you hast to your maister!’ If the
worst happen, entertaine yourselves in yourselves; As a Councellour of my acquaintance,
having degorged a rable of paragraphes with an extreme contention and like foolishnesse,
going out of the counsell chamber to a pissing place near unto it, was heard very
conscienciously to utter these words to himself: Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed
nomini tuo da gloriam (Psal. cvx. i.). ’Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us but unto your name
give the glory.’ He that cannot otherwise, let him pay himself out of his own purse.
Fame does not so basely prostitute itself, nor so cheape. Rare and exemplar actions, to
which it duly belongeth, could not brooke the company of this innumerable multitude of
vulgar petty actions. Well may a piece of marble raise your titles both as you list, because
you have repaired a piece of an olde Wall, or cleansed a common ditch, but men of

judgement will never do it. Report followeth not all goodnesse, except difficulty and
rarietie be joined thereunto. Yea simple estimation, according to the Stoics, is not due to
every action proceeding from virtue. Neither would they have him commended, who
through temperance abstaineth from an old blear-ey’d woman. Such as have knowen the
admirable qualities of Scipio the Affrican, renounce the glory which Panætius ascribeth
unto him, to have abstained from gifts, as a glory, not his, alone, but peculiar to that age.
We have pleasures sortable to our fortune; let us not usurpe those of greatness. Our own
are more natural. They are the more solid and firme by how much the meaner. Since it is
not for conscience, at least for ambition let us refuse ambition. Let us disdaine this
insatiate thirst of honor and renown, base and beggerly, which makes us so suppliantly
to crave it of all sorts of people: Quæ est ista laus quæ possite macello peti? (Cic. De Fin.
ii.) ’What praise is this, which may be fetcht out of the Shambles?’ By abject means, and
at what vile rate soever. To be thus honoured, is meerely a dishonour. Learne we to be no
more greedy of glory then we are capable of it. To be proud of ever profitable and
innocent action, is it fit for men to whom it is extraordinary and rare. They will value it for
the price it cost them. According as a good effect is more resounding, I abate of its
goodnesse; the jealousie I conceive, it is produced more because it is so resounding than
because it is good. What is set out to show is halfe solde. Those actions have more grace
which carelesly and under silence pass from the hands of a Workeman, and which some
honest man afterward chuseth and redeemeth from darkenesse, to thrust them into the
worlds light: Only for their worth. Mihi quidem laudabiliora videntur omnia, quæ sine
venditatione, et sine populo teste fiunt: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. ii.)’All things in sooth seem to me
more commendable that are performed with no ostentation, and without the people to
witness,’ said the most glorious man of the world. I had no care but to preserve and
continue, which are deafe and insensible effects. Innovation is of great lustre; But
interdicted in times when we are most urged, and have to defend ourselves but from
novelties; Abstinence from doing is often as generous as doing, but it is not so apparant.
My small worth is in a manner all of this kind. To be short, the occasions in this my
charge have seconded my complexion, for which I conne them harty thanks. Is there any
man that desires to be sicke, to see his Physition set a work? And Should not that
Physition be well whipped who to put his arte in practize, would wish the plague to infect
us? I was never possessed with this impious and vulgar passion, to wish that the troubled
and distempered state of this City might raise and honor my government. I have most
willingly lent them my hand to further and shoulders to aid their ease and tranquility. He
that will not thanke me for the good order and for the sweet and undisturbed rest which
has accompanied my charge, cannot at least deprive me of that part which by the title of
my good fortune belongeth unto me. This is my humor, that I love as much to be happy
as wise, and attribute my successes as much to the meere gr ace of God as to the meane
furtherance of my operation. I had sufficiently published to the World my sufficiency in
managing of such public affairs; Nay, there is something in me worse than
insufficiency, Which is, that I am not much displeased therewith, and that I endeavor not
greatly to cure it, considering the course of life I have determined to my self. Nor have I
satisfied my self in this employment, But have almost attainted what I had promised unto

my self; Yet have I much exceeded what I had promised those with whom I was to
negotiate, For I willingly promise somewhat less then I can performe or hope to
accomplish. Of this I am assured, I have never left offence or hatred among them. To have
left either regret or desire of me, This know I certainly, I have not much affected it.
------ Mene huic confidere monstro?
Mene salis placidi vultum, fiuctdsque quietos
Ignorare? -- VIRG. Æn. 1. v. 849.
Should I this monster trust? Should I not know
The calme Seas counterfeit dissembling show
How quietly sometimes the flouds will go?



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER XI: OF THE LAME OR CRIPPEL






CHAPTER XI: OF THE LAME OR CRIPPEL
WO OR three years are now past since the yeere has been shortned
tenne dayes in France. Oh how many changes are like to ensue this
reformation! It was a right remooving of Heaven and Earth together,
yet nothing remooveth from it’s own place: My Neighbours find the
season of their seede and Harvest time, the opportunity of their affairs,
their lucky and unlucky dayes, to answer just those seasons to which
they had from all ages assigned them. Neither was the error heretofore
perceived, nor is the reformation now discerned in our use. So much uncertainty is there in
all things; So grosse, so obscure and so dull [is] our understanding. Some are of opinion
this reformation might have bin redressed after a less incommodious manner; substracting
according to the example of Augustus, for some years, the bissextile or leape day, Which
in some sort is but a day of hinderance and trouble, Until they might more exactly have
satisfied the debt, Which by this late reformation is not done, For we are yet some dayes
in arrerages; And if by such a meane we might provide for times to come, appoynting that
after the revolution of such or such a number of years, that extraordinary day might for

ever be eclipsed; so that our misreckoning should not henceforward exceed foure and
twenty hours. We have no other computation of time, but years; The World has used
them so many ages; and yet is it a measure we have not until this day perfectly
established. And such as we daily doubt. what form other Nations have diversely given
the same; and which was the true use of it. And if some day,that the Heavens in growing
olde compresse themselves towards us, and cast into an uncertainty of hours and dayes?
And as Plutarke says of moneths, that even in his dayes Astrology could not yet limit the
motion of the moone? Are not we then well holp-up to keep a register of things past! I
was even now plodding (as often I do) upon this, what free and gadding instrument
humane reason is. I ordinarily see that men, in matters proposed them, do more willingly
ammuze and busie themselves in seeking out the reasons than in searching out the trueth
of them. They omit pre-suppositions, but curiously examine consequences. They leave
things, and run to causes. Oh conceited [discoursers]! The knowledge of causes does
only concerne him who has the conduct of things; Not us that have but the sufferance of
them. And who according to our neede, without entering into their beginning and essence,
have perfectly the full and absolute use of them. Nor is wine more pleasant unto him that
knowes the first faculties of it. Contrariwise, both the body and the mind interrupt and
alter the right which they have of the worlds use and of themselves, commixing therewith
the opinion of learning. The effects concerne us, but the means nothing at all. To
determine and distribute belongeth to superiority and regency as accepting, to subjection
and apprentise-shippe. Let us re-assume our custom. They commonly beginne thus: How
is such a thing done? Whereas, they should say: Is such a thing done? Our discourse is
capable to frame an hundred other Worlds, and find the beginnings and contexture of
them. It needeth neither matter nor ground. Let it but run on; It will as well build upon
emptinesse as upon fulnesse, and with inanity as with matter.
Dare pondus idonea fumo. -- Pers. Sat. v. 20.
That things which vanish straight
In smoke, should yet bear weight.
I find that we should say most times: ’There is no such thing.’ And I would often
employ this answer, but I dare not; for they cry: It is a defeature reduced by ignorance and
weakenesse of spirit. And most commonly juggle for company sake, to treate of idle
subjects and frivolous discourses, which I believe nothing at all. Since truely, it is a rude
and quarrelous humor, flatly to deny a proposition. And few misse (especially in things
hard to be persuaded) to affirme, that they have seen it; Or to alleadge such witnesses as
their authority shall stay our contradiction. According to which use we know the
foundation and means of a thousand things that never were. And the world is in a
thousand questions discanted and bandied too and fro, the pro and contra of which is
meerely false. Ita finitima sunt falsa veris ut in præcipitem locum non debeat se sapiens
committere: (Cic. Acad. Que. iv.) ’Falsehood is so near Neighbour to trueth, that a
wiseman should not put himself upon a slipperie downefall. Truth and falsehood have

both likewise countenances; their port, their taste, and their proceedings semblable.’ We
behold them with one same eyes. I observe that we are not only slow in defending our
selves from deceipt, but that we seek and sue to embrace it. We love to meddle and
entangle ourselves with vanity, as conformable unto our being. I have seen the birth of
diverse miracles in my dayes. Although they be smoothered in the first growth, we omit
not to foresee the course they would have taken had they lived their full age. The matter is
to find the end of the clue; that found, one may winde-off what he list; And there is a
further distance from nothing to the least thing in the World, than betweene that and the
greatest. Now the first that are embrued with the beginning of strangenesse, coming to
publish their history, find by the oppositions made against them, where the difficulty of
persuasion lodgeth, and go about with some false patch to botch up those places. Besides
that, Insita hominibus libidine alendi de industria rumores. ’Men having a natural desire
to nourish reports.’ We naturally make it a matter of conscience to restore what has been
lent us, without some usury and accession of our encrease. A particular error does first
breed a public error; And when his turn commeth, a public error begetteth a
particular error. So goeth all this vast frame, from hand to hand, confounding and
composing itself, in such sort that the furthest-abiding testimony, is better instructed of
it then the nearest, and the last informed better persuaded then the first. It is natural
progresse; for whosoever beleeveth any thing, thinkes it a deede of charity to persuade it
unto another; Which that he may the better effect, he feareth not to adde something of his
own invention thereunto, so far as he seeth necessary in his discourse, to supply the
resistance and defect, he imagineth to be in anothers conception. My self who make an
especiall matter of conscience to lie, and care not greatly to add credit or authority to what
I say, perceive, nevertheless by the discourses I have in hand, that being earnested, either
by the resistance of another or by the earnestnesse of my naration, I swell and amplifie my
subject by my voice, motions, vigor and force of wordes; as also by extension and
amplification, not without some prejudice to the naked truth. But yet I do it upon
condition that to the first that brings me home again, and enquireth for the bare and
simple truth at my hands, I sodainly give over my hold, and without exaggeration,
emphasis or amplification, I yield both my self and it unto him: A likely, earnest and
ready speech as mine, is easy transported into hyperboles. There is nothing whereunto
men are ordinarily more prone then to give way to their opinions. Where ever usual
means faile us, we adde commandement, force, fire and sword. It is not without some ill
fortune to come to that pass, that the multitude of believers in a throng where fooles do
in number so far exceed the wise, should be the best touchstone of truth. Quasi vero
quidquam sit tam valde, quam nil sapere vulgare. Sanitatis patrocinium est insanientium
turba: (Cic. De Divin. ii.) ’As though any thing were so common as to have no wit. The
multitude of them that are mad is a defense for them that are in their wit.’ It is a hard
matter for a man to resolve his judgement against common opinions. The first persuasion
taken from the very subject seizeth on the simple: whence under th’authority of the
number and antiquity of testimonies it extends itself on the wiser sort. As for me, in a
matter which I could not believe being reported by one, I should never credit the same
though affirmed by a hundred. And I judge not opinions by years. It is not long since one

of our Princes, in whom the gowt had spoiled a gentle disposition and blith composition,
suffered himsefe so far to be persuaded or misled by the reports made unto him of the
wondrous deedes of a Priest, who by way of charmes, spells and gestures cured all
diseases, that he undertook a long-tedious journy to find him out; and by the virtue of
his apprehension did so persuade, and for certain hours so lull his legs asleepe, that for
a while he brought them to do him that service which for a long time they had forgotten.
Had fortune heaped five or six like accidents one in the necke of another, they had
doubtles been able to bring this miracle into nature. Whereas afterward there was so
much simplicity and so little skill found in the architect of these works, that he was
deemed unworthy of any punishment: As likewise should be done,with most such-like
things, were they throughly knowen in their nature. Miramur ex intervallo fallentia: ’We
wonder at those things that deceive us by distance.’ Our sight does in such sort, often
represent us a far-off with strange images, which vanish in approaching nearer.
Nunquam ad liquidum fama perducitur: ’Fame is never brought to be clear.’ It is a
wonder to see how from many vain beginnings and frivolous causes, so famous
impressions do ordinarily arise and ensue. Even that hindereth the information of them:
For while a man endevoureth to find out causes, forcible and weighty ends, and worthy
so great a name, he loses the true and essentiall. They are so little that they escape our
sight. And verily a right wise, heedy and subtle inquisitor is required in such questings -
impartiall and not preoccupated. All these miracles and strange events, are until this day
hidden from me: I have seen no such monster or more express wonder in this world than
my self. With time and custom a man does acquaint and enure himself to all
strangenesse: But the more I frequent and know my self the more my deformitie
astonishes me, and the less I understand my self. The chiefest priviledge to produce and
advance such accidents is reserved unto fortune. Travelling yesterday through a village
within two leagues of my house, I found the place yet warme of a miracle that was but
newly failed and discovered, wherewith all the country thereabout had for many months
been amused and abused, and diverse bordering Provinces began to listen unto it, and
severall troupes of all qualities ceased not thicke and threefold to flocke thither. A yong
man of that town undertook one night in his own house (never dreaming of any
knavery) to counterfeit the voice of a spirit or ghost; but only for sport, to make himself
merry for that present, which succeeding better than be had imagined, to make the jest
extend further and himself the merrier, he made a country maiden acquainted with his
devise; who because she was both seely and harmelesse, consented to be secret and to
second him: In the end they got another, and were now three, all of one age and like
sufficiency; and from private spirit-talking, they beganne with hideous voices to cry and
roare aloud, and in and about churches biding themselves under the chief Altar, speaking
but by night, forbidding any light to be set up; From speeches tending the worlds
subversion, and threatning of the day of judgement (which are the subiects by whose
authority and abusive reverence imposture and illusion is more easily lurked) they
proceeded to certain visions and strange gestures, so foolish and ridiculous that there is
scarce any thing more grosse and absurd used among Children in their childish sports.
Suppose, I pray you, that fortune would have seconded this harmelesse devise or jugling

tricke, Who knows how far it would have extended, and to what it would have
growen? The poore seely three Divels are now in prison, and may happily e’re long pay
dear for their common sottishnesse, and I wot not whether some cheverell judge or other
will be avenged of them for his. It is manifestly seen in this, which now is discovered, as
also in diverse other things of like quality, exceeding our knowledge; I am of opinion that
we uphold our judgement as well to reject as to receive. Many abuses are engendered into
the World, or, to speak more boldly, all the abuses of the World are engendered upon
this, that we are taught to fear to make profession of our ignorance, and are bound to
accept and allow all that we cannot refute. We speak of all things by precepts and
resolution. The Stile of Rome did hear that even the same that a witnes deposed, because
he had seen it with his own eyes, and that which a Judge ordained of his most assured
knowledge, was conceived in this form of speech, ’It seems so unto me.’ I am drawen to
hate likely things, when men go about to set them down as infallible. I love these words
or phrases which mollifie and moderate the temerity of our propositions: ’It may be:
Peradventure: In some sort: Some: It is aside: I think,’ and such like: And had I been to
instruct children, I would so often have put this manner of answering in their mouth,
enquiring and not resolving: ’What means it? I understand it not: It may well be: Is it
true?’ that they should rather have kept the form of learners until three score yeeres of
age, than present themselves Doctors at ten, as many do. Whosoever will be cured of
ignorance must confesse the same. Iris is the daughter of Thaumantis; Admiration is the
ground of all Philosophy; Inquisition the progresse; Ignorance the end. Yea but there is
some kind of ignorance strong and generous, that for honor and courage is nothing
beholding to knowledge. An ignorance which to conceive rightly there is required no less
learning than to conceive true learning.
Being yong, I saw a law-case which Corras, a Counsellor of Thoulouse, caused to be
printed of a strange accident of two men, who presented themselves one for another. I
remember (and I remember nothing else so well) that me thought, he proved his
imposture, whom he condemned as guilty, so wondrous strange and so far exceeding both
our knowledge and his own who was judge, that I found much boldnes in the sentence
which had condemned him to be hanged. Let us receive some form of sentence that may
say: ’The Court understands nothing of it; more freely and ingenuously than did the
Areopagites, who finding themselves urged and entangled in a case they could not well
clear or determine, appointed the parties to come again and appeare before them a
hundred years after. The witches about my country are in hazard of their life upon the
opinion of every new authour that may come to give their dreames a body. To apply such
examples as the holy Word of God offreth us of such things (assured and irrefragable
examples) and ioyne them to our modern events, since we neyther see the causes nor
means of them, some other better wit than ours is thereunto required. Peradventure it
appertaineth to that only most-mighty testimony to tell us, this here, and that there, and
not this other are of them. God must be beleeved, and good reason he should be so. Yet is
there not one amongst us that will be amazed at his own narration (and he ought
necessarily to be astonished at it, if he be not out of his wits) whether he employ it about
others matters or against himself. I am plaine and homely, and take hold on the main

point, and on that which is most likely, avoiding ancient reproches. Majorem fidem
homines adhibent iis quæ non intelligunt. Cupidine humani ingenii libentius obscura
creduntur: ’Men give more credit to things they understand not; Things obscure are more
willingly beleeved through a strange desire of mans wit.’ I see that men will be angry, and
am forbid to doubt of it upon pain of execrable injuries, A new manner of perswading.
Mercy for God’s sake. My beliefe is not carried away with blowes. Let them tyrannize
over such as accuse their opinion of falsehood; I only accuse mine of difficulty and
boldness. And equally to them I condemne the opposite affirmation, if not so
imperiously. He that with bravery and by commandement will establish his discourse
declareth his reason to be weake. For a verball and scholastical altercation that they have
as much apparance as their contradictors. Videantur sane, non affirmentur modo: ’Indeede
let them seem, so they be not avouched.’ But in effectuall consequence they draw from
it, these have great ods. To kill men there is required a bright-shining and clear light.
And our life is over-reall and essentiall to warrant their supernaturall and fantastic
accidents. As for drugges and poisons, they are out of my element; they are homicides,
and of the worst kind. In which, nevertheless, it is said that one must not alwayes rely
upon the meere confession of those people: For they have sometimes been seen to
accuse themselves to have made away men which were both sound and living. In these
other extravagant accusations I should easily say that it sufficeth what commendations
soever he has, a man be believed in such things as are humane, but of such as are beyond
his conception and of a supernaturall effect, he ought then only be believed when a
supernaturall approbation has authorized him. That priviledge if has pleased God to give
some of our testimonies ought not to be vilified, or slightly communicated. Mine ears are
full of a thousand such tales. Three saw him such a day in the east; three saw him the next
day in the west, at such an hour, in such a place, and thus and thus attired; verily in such
a case I could not believe my self. How much more natural and more likely do I find
it, that two men should lie, then one in twelve hours pass with the winds from East to
West? How much more natural that our understanding may by the volubility of our loose-
capring mind be transported from his place? then that one of us should by a strange spirit,
in flesh and bone, be carried upon a broome through the tunnell of a chimny? Let us, who
are perpetually tossed too and fro with domesticall and our own illusions, not seek for
forrane and unknowen illusions. I deem it a matter pardonable not to believe a wonder,
so far foorth at least as one may divert and exlude the verification by no miraculous way.
And I follow Saint Augustine’s opinion, that ’a man were better bend towards doubt than
encline towards certaintie, in matters of difficult trial and dangerous beliefe.’ Some
years are now past that I travelled through the country of a sovereign Prince, who in
favor of me, and to abate my incredulity, did me the grace, in his own presence and in
a particular place, to make me see tenne or twelve prisoners of that kind, and amongst
others an olde beldam witch, a true and perfect sorceresse, both by her ugliness and
deformity, and such a one as long before was most famous in that profession. I sawe both
proofes, witnesses, voluntary confessions, and some other insensible markes about this
miserable olde woman. I enquired and talked with her a long time, with the greatest heed
and attention I could, yet am I not easily carried away by preoccupation. In the end, and in

in conscience, I should rather have appointed them Helleborum than Hemlocke. Captisque
res magis mentibus quam consceleratis similis visa. ’The matter seemed liker to mindes
captivate than guiltie.’ Law has her own corrections for such diseases. Touching the
oppositions and arguments that honest men have made unto me, both there and often
elsewhere, I have found none that tie me, and that admit not alwaies a more likely
solution than their conclusions. True it is that proofes and reasons grounded upon the fact
and experience, I untie not, for indeede they have no end, but often cut them, as Alexander
did his knot. When al is done it is an overvaluing of ones conjectures by them to cause a
man to be burned alive. It is reported by diverse examples (and Prestantius says of his
father) that being in a slumber much more deeply then in a full sound sleepe, he dreamed
and verily thought himself to be a Mare, and served certain soldiers for a sumpter-
horse, and was indeede what he imagined to be. If sorcerers dreame thus materially: If
dreames may sometimes be thus incorporated into effects, I cannot possibly believe that
our will should therefore be bound to the laws and justice; which I say, as one who am
neither a Judge nor a Counsellor unto kings, and furthest from any such worthinesse; but
rather a man of the common stamp, and both by my deedes and sayings borne and vowed
to the obedience of public reason. He that should register my humors to the prejudice
of the simplest law, or opinion, or custom of this village, should greatly wrong himself
and injure me as much. For in what I say, I gape for no other certainly but that such was
then my thought. A tumultuous and wavering thought. It is by way of discourse that I
speak of all, and of nothing by way of advise. Nec me pudet, ut istos, fateri nescire quod
resciam: ’Nor am I ashamed, as they are to confesse I know not that which I do not
know.’
I would not be so hardy to speak if of duty I ought to be believed; and so I answered a
great man who blamed the sharpnesse and contention of my exhortations. When I see you
bent and prepared on one side, with all the endeavor I can I will propose the contrary unto
you, to resolve and enlighten your judgement, not to subdue or binde the same. God has
your hearts in his hands, and he will furnish you with choise. I am not so malapert as to
desire that my opinions alone should give sway to a matter of such importance. My
fortune has not raised them to so powerfull and deepe conclusions. Truely, I have not
only a great number of complexions, but an infinite many of opinions, from which, had I
a son of my own, I would disswade him, and willingly make him to distaste them.
What? If the truest are not ever the most commodious for man, he being of so strange and
untamed a composition: Whether it be to the purpose, or from the purpose, it is no great
matter. It is a common Proverbe in Italie, that ’He knowes not the Perfect pleasure of
Venus that has not laine with a limping woman.’ Either fortune or some particular
accident have long since brought this by-saying in the peoples mouth; and it is as well
spoken of men as of women, For the Queene of the Amazons answered the Scithian that
wooed her to loves-embracements. αριστα χολ’ος οιει, ’The crooked man does it best.’ In
that feminine common-wealth of theirs, to avoyde the domination of men, they were wont
in their infancy to maime them, both their arms, and legs, and other limbs, that might
any way advantage their strength over them, and make only that use of them that we in
our World make of our Women. I would have said that the loose or disjoynted motion of

a limping or crooke-backt Woman might adde some new kind of pleasure unto that
business or sweet sinne, and some un-assaid sensuall sweetness to such as make trial
of it; but I have lately learnt that even ancient Philosophy has decided the matter, Who
says that the legs and thighs of the crooked-backt or halting-lame, by reason of their
imperfection, not receiving the nourishment due unto them, it followeth that the Genitall
parts that are above them are more full, better nourished and more vigorous. Or else, that
such a defect hindring other exercise, such as are therewith possessed, do less waste their
strength and consume their virtue and so much the stronger and fuller they come to Venus
sports. Which is also the reason why the Græcians described their Women- Weavers to
be more hotte and earnestly-luxurious than other Women; Because of their sitting-trade
without any violent exercise of the body. What cannot we dispute of according to that
rate? I might likewise say of these, that the same stirring which their labor so sitting does
give them, does rouze and sollicite them, as the jogging and shaking of their Coache does
our Ladies. Doe not these examples fit that whereof I spake in the beginning? That our
reasons do often anticipate the effect, and have the extension of their jurisdiction so
infinite, that they judge and exercise themselves in inanity, and to a not being? Besides the
flexibilitie of our invention, to frame reasons unto all manner of dreames; our imagination
is likewise found easy to receive impressions from falsehood by very frivolous
apparances. For, by the only authoring of the ancient and public use of this word or
phrase, I have heretofore persuaded my self to have received more pleasure of a Woman
in that she was not straight, and have accompted her crookednesse in the number of her
graces. Torquato Tasso, in the comparison he makes between Italy and France, reporteth
to have noted that we commonly have more slender and spiny legs than the Italian
Gentlemen; and, imputeth the cause unto our continuall riding and sitting on horse-backe.
Which is the very same, from which Suetonius draweth another cleane contrary
conclusion; For, he says, that Germanicus had by the frequent use of this exercise brought
his to be very big. There is nothing so supple and wandering as our understanding. It is
like to Theramenez shooe, fit for all feet. It is double and diverse, and so are matters
diverse and double. Give me a Dragme of Silver, said a Cinicke Philosopher unto
Antigonus. It is not the present of a King answered he; Give then a talent: It is not gift for
a Cinicke, quoth he.
Seu plures calor ille vias, et cæca relaxat
Spiramenta, novas veniat qua succus in herbas:
Seu durat magis, et venas astringit hiantes,
Ne tenues pluviæ. rapidive potentia solis
Acrior, aut Boreæ penetrabile frigus adurat. -- Virg. Georg. i. 89.
Whether the heate layes open holes unseen,
Whereby the sappe may pass to hearbs fresh-greene
Or rather hardens and bindes gaping vaines,
Lest sharpe power of hot sunne, or thinning raines
Or piercing North-cold blaste,

Should scortch, consume and waste.
Ogni medaglia ha il suo riverscio: ’Each outside has his inside,’ says the Italian. See,
why Clitomachus was wont to say that Carneades had surmounted the labours of
Hercules, because be had exacted consent from men; that is to say, opinion and temerity
to judge. This fantasia of Carneades, so vigorous (as I imagine) proceeded antiently from
the impudency of those who make profession to know, and from their excessive self-
overweening. Aesope was set to sale, together with two other slaves; a Chapman enquired
of the first what he could do; he to endeare him self, answered, mountains and wonders,
and what not? For he knew and could do all things. The second answered even so for
himself, and more too; But when he came to Aesope, and demaunded of him what be
could do, Nothing (said he), for these two have forestaled all, and know and can do all
things, and have left nothing for me. So has it happened in the schoole of philosophy.
The rashnes of those who ascribed the capacity of all things to mans wit, through spight
and emulation produced this opinion in others, that humane wit was not capable of any
thing. Some holde the same extremity in ignorance that others hold in knowledge. To the
end none may deny that man is not immoderate in all and every where, and has no other
sentence or arrest than that of necessity, and impuissance to proceede farther.



Return to

: Book III.
CHAPTER XII: OF PHISIOGNOMY






CHAPTER XII: OF PHISIOGNOMY
LMOST all the opinions we have are taken by authority and upon
credit: There is no hurt. We cannot chuse worse then by ourselves in so
weake an age. This image of Socrates his discourse, which his friends
have left us, we only approve it by the reverence of publicke
approbation. It is not for our own knowledge: they are not according to
our use. Might such a man be borne now adayes, there are but few
would now esteeme him. We discerne not graces inly or aright; We
only perceive them by a false light set out and puft up with arte; Such as pass under
their natural purity and simplicity do easily escape so weake and dimnme a sight as ours
is. Tbey have a secret, unperceived and delicate beauty; he had neede of a clear, far-
seeing and true-discerning sight that should rightly discover this secret light. Is not
ingenuity (according to us) cosin germaine unto sottishnesse, and a quality of reproach?
Socrates maketh his soul to moove, with a natural and common motion. Thus says a
plaine Country-man, and thus a seely Woman: He never has other people in his mouth
than Coach-makers, Joyners, Coblers, and Masons. They are inductions and similitudes,

drawen from the most vulgar and knowen actions of men: every one understands him.
Under so base a form we should never have chosen the noble worthinesse and
brightnesse of his admirable conceptions; We that esteeme all those but meane and vile
that learning does not raise, and who have no perceiving of riches except set out in show
and pompe. Our World is framed but unto ostentation. Men are puffed up with winde, and
moved or handled by bounds, as Baloones. This man proposeth no vain fantasies unto
himself. His end was to store us with things and furnish us with precepts, which really
more substantially and joyntly serve our life:
-----servare modum, finemque tenere,
Naturamque sequi. -- LUCAN. Bel. Civ. ii. 380.
To keep a meane, to hold the end,
And natures conduct to attend.
So was he ever all one a like: And raised himself to the highest pitch of vigor, not by fits,
but by complexion. Or to say better, he raised nothing, but rather brought down and
reduced all difficulties or sharpnesse to their originall and natural state, and thereunto
subdued vigor. For in Cato it is manifestly seen to be an out-right proceeding, far above
and beyond the common; By the brave exploits of his life, and in his death, he is ever
perceived to be mounted upon his great horses. Whereas this man keepes on the ground,
and with a gentle and ordinary pace treateth of the most profitable discourses, and
addresseth himself both unto death and to the most thorny and crabbed crosses, that may
happen unto the course of humane life. It has indeede fortuned, that the worthiest man to
be known, and for a patterne to be presented to the world, he is the man of whom we
have most certain knowledge. He has been declared and enlightned by the most clear-
seeing men that ever were; the testimonies we have of him are in faithfulnesse and
sufficiency most admirable. It is a great matter that ever he was able to give such order
unto the pure imaginations of a child, that without altring or wresting them, he has
thence produced the fairest effects of our mind. He neither represents it rich nor high
raised, but sound and pure, and ever with a blithe and undefiled health. By these vulgar
springs and natural wards, by these ordinary and common fantasies, sans mooving or
without urging himself, he erected not only the most regular, but the highest and most
vigorous opinions, actions, and customs that ever were. He it is that brought humane
wisdom fro m heaven again, where for a long time it had been lost, to restore it unto
man; where her most just and laborious work is. See or hear him pleade before his
judges; marke with what reasons he rouzeth his courage to the hazards of war, what
arguments fortifie his patience against detraction, calumniation, tyrranny, death, and
against his wives peevish head; therein is nothing borrowed from art or from learning. The
simplest may there know their means and might; it is impossible to go further backe or
lower. He has done humane nature a great kindness to show what and how much she can
do of herself. We are every one richer than we imagine, but we are taught to borrow
and instructed to shift; and rather to make use of others goods and means then of our

own. There is nothing whereon man can stay or fix himself in time of his need. Of
voluptuousness, of riches, of pleasure, of power, he ever embraceth more than be can
graspe or hold; His greedinesse is incapable of moderation. The very same I find to be in
the curiosity of learning and knowledge; he cuts out more work than he can well make an
end of, and much more then be neede. Extending the profit of learning as far as his
matter. Ut omnium rerum, sic literarum quoque intemperantia laboramus: (SEN. Epist.
cvi. f.) ’We are sicke of a surfet, as of all things, so of learning also.’ And Tacitus has
reason to commend Agricolæs mother, to have brideled in her son an over-burning and
earnest desire of learning. It is a good, being neerely looked unto, that containeth as other
humane goods, much peculiar vanity and natural weakenesse, and is very chargeable; The
acquisition and purchase whereof is much more hazardous then of all other viands and
beverage. For whatsoever else we have bought, we carry home in some vessell or other,
where we have law to examine its worth, how much and at what time we are to take it. But
Sciences, we cannot sodainly put them into any other vessell than our mind: we swallow
them in buying them, and go from the market either already infected or amended. There
are some which insteade of nourishing do but hinder and surcharge us; and other some
which under colour of curing empoison us. I have taken pleasure in some place to see men
who for devotions sake have made a vow of ignorance, as of chastity, poverty and
penitence. It is also a kind of guelding of our inordinate appetites to muzzle this
greedinesse, which provoketh us to the study of bookes, and depriveth the mind of that
voluptuous delight which, by the opinion of learning does so tickle us. And it is richly to
accomplish the vow of poverty to join that of the mind unto it. We neede not much
learning for to live at ease. And Socrates teacheth us that we have both it, and the way to
find and make use of it, within us. All our sufficiency that is beyond the natural is well
nigh vain and superfluous. It is much if it charge and trouble us no more then it steads us.
Paucis opus est literis, ad mentem bonam: (Sen. ibid. ) ’We have neede of little learning to
have a good mind.’ They are febricitant excesses of our spirit, a turbulent and unquiet
instrument. Rowze up your self, and you shall find forcible arguments against death to
be in your self; most true and very proper to serve and steade you in time of necessity.
’Tis they which induce a peasant swaine, indeed whole nations, to die as constantly as
any Philosopher. Should I have died less merily before I read the Tusculanes? I think
not. And when I find my self in my best wits I perceive that I have somewhat enriched
my tongue, my courage but little. It is even as nature framed the same at first. And against
any conflict it shields itself, but with a natural and common march. Bookes have not so
much served me for instruction as exercitation. What if learning, assaying to arm us
with new wards and fences against natural inconveniences, has more imprinted their
greatness and weight in our fantasies then her reasons, quiddities, and subtilities,
therewith to cover us? They are subtilities indeed, by which she often awaketh us very
vainely. Observe how many sleight and idle arguments the wisest and closest authors
frame and scatter about one good sound, which if you but consider neerely are but vain
and incorporall. They are but verball wiles which beguile us. But forasmuch as it may be
profitable I will not otherwise blanch them. Many of that condition are scattered here and
there, in diverse places of this volume, either borrowed or imitated. Yet should a man

somewhat heed be call not that force which is but quaintness or terme that which is but
quipping sharpe, solid; or name that good which is but fair: Quæ magis gustata quam
potata delectant: (CIC. Tusc. Qu. v.) ’Which more delight us being but tasted, then swild
and swallowed down.’ All that which pleaseth feedeth not : Ubi non ingenii sed animi
negocium agitur: ’Where it is no matter of wit, but of courage.’ To see the strugling
endevors which Seneca gives himself to prepare himself against death; to see him
sweate with panting; to see him bathe so long upon this pearch, thereby to strengthen and
assure himself; I should have made question of his reputation had be not most undantedly
maintained the same in his death. His so violent and frequent agitation sheweth that
himself was fervent, and impetuous. Magnus animus remissius loquitur, et securius: Non
est alius ingenio alius animo color: (SEN. Epist. cxv. Eleg. i. ) ’A great courage speaks
softly but securely. Wit has not one colour and courage another.’ He must be convicted at
his own charges, and sheweth in some sort that he was pressed by his adversary.
Plutarkes manner by how much more disdainful and far- extending it is (in my opinion)
so much more manlike and perswasive is it; I should easily believe that his soul had her
motions more assured and more regu lar. The one more sharpe, pricketh and sodainely
starts us, toucheth the spirit more. The other more solid, does constantly enforme,
establish and comfort us; toucheth more the understanding. That ravisheth our judgement;
this does gain it. I have likewise seen other compositions and more reverenced, which in
portraying the combate they endure against the provocations of the flesh, represent them
so violent, so powerfull and invincible, that ourselves, who are cast in the common mould
of other men, have as much to admire the unknown strangenesse and unfelt vigor of their
temptation, as their constant resistance. To what do we so arm and steele ourselves with
these labouring-efforts of learning? Let us diligently survay the surface of the earth, and
there consider so many seely-poore people as we see toyling, sweltring and drooping
about their businesses which never heard of Aristotle nor of Plato, nor ever knew what
exemples or precepts are. From those does nature dayly draw and afoord us effects of
constancy and patternes of patience, more pure and forcible then are those we so curiously
study-for in schooles. How many do I ordinarily see that misacknowledge poverty; how
many that wish for death, or that pass it without any alarm or affliction? A fellow that
dungeth my garden has happily this morning buried his father or his child. The very
names whereby they call diseases do somewhat mylden and diminish the sharpnes of
them. With them a Phthysique or consumption of the lungs is but an ordinary cough: A
dysentery or bloody flux but a distemper of the stomacke; A pleurisie but a cold or murre;
and as they gently name them so they easily endure them. Grievous are they indeed when
they hinder their ordinary labor or breake their usual rest: They will not take their beds
but when they shall dy. Simplex illa et aperta virtus in obscuram et solertem scienti am
versa est: ’That plaine and clear virtue is turned into obscure and cunning knowledge.’ I
was writing this about a time that a boistrous storme of our tumultuous broiles and bloody
troubles did for many months space, with all its might and horrour, hang full over my
head. On the one side I had the enemies at my gates; on the other the Picoreurs or
freebooters, far worse foes. Non armis sed vitiis certatur: ’We contend not with armour,
but with vices.’ And at one time felt and endured all manner of harme-bringing military

injuries:
Hostis adest dextra lævaque h parte timendus,
Vicinoque malo terret utrumque latus. -- OVID. Pont. Eleg. iv. 55.
A fearefull foe on left hand and on right
Does with his neighbour harmes both sides afright.
Oh monstrous Warre: Others work without, this inwardly and against herself, And
with her own venome gnaweth and consumes herself. It is of so ruinous and maligne a
Nature, that, together with all things els, she ruineth herself; and with spitefull rage does
rent, deface and massacre itself. We do more often see it, by and through herself, to
were, to desolate and dissolve herself, then by or through want of any necessary thing, or
by enemies force. All manner of discipline does shunne and flie it. She commeth to cure
sedition, and herself is throughly therewith infected; She goeth about to chastize dis-
obedience, and sheweth the example of it; and being employed for the defense of Lawes
entreth into actuall rebellion against her own ordinances. Aye me, where are we? Our
Phisicke bringeth infection.
Nostre mal s’empoisonne
Du secours qu’on luy donne.
Our evil is empoysond more
By plaister they would lay to the sore.
----- exuperat magis ægrescitque medendo. -- VIRG. Æn. xii.
It rises higher, quicker,
And growes by curing sicker.
Omnia fanda nefanda malo permista furore.
Justificam nobis’mentem avertere Deorum. -- CATUL. Argon. v. 405.
Lawfull unlawfull deeds with fury blended,
Have turn’d from us the Gods just mind offended.
In these popular diseases one may in the beginning distinguish the sound from the
sicke; but if they chance to continue any time, as ours has done and does still, all the
body, indeed head and heels, feel themselves the worse; no part is exempted from
corruption; for there is no aire a man draws so greedily, or sucks so gluttonously, and
that more spreds itself or penetrates more deepely, then does licentiousnesse. Our
Armies have no other bond to tie them, or other eyment to fasten them, then what

commeth from strangers. It is now a hard matter to frame a body of a more compleate,
constant, well-ordered and coherent Army of Frenchmen. Oh, what shame is it? We have
no other discipline then what borrowed or auxiliar Soldiers show us. As for us, we are
led-on by our own discretion and not by the commanders; each man followeth his own
humor, and has more to do within then without. It is the commandement should follow,
court and yield unto, he only ought to obey; all the rest are free and loose. I am pleased
to see what remisnesse and pusilanimity is in ambition, and by what steps of abjection and
servitude it must arrive unto its end. But I am displeased to see some debonaire and well-
meaning minds, indeed such as are capable of justice, dayly corrupted about the managing
and commanding of this many-headed confusion. Long sufferance begets custom;
custom, consent and imitation. We had too-too many infected and ill-borne minds
without corrupting the good, the sound, and the generous; so that, if we continue any time,
it will prove a difficult matter to find out a man unto whose skill and sufficiency the
health or recovery of this state may be committed in trust, if fortune shall happily be
pleased to restore it us again.
Hunc saltem everso juvenem succurrere seclo,
Ne prohibete.
Forbid not yet this youth at least,
To aide this age more then opprest.
What is become of that ancient precept, That Soldiers ought more to fear their General
than their enemy? And of that wonderful examplelesse example, That the Roman army,
having upon occasion enclosed within her trenches, and round-beset an apple-orchard, so
obedient was she to her Captains, that the next morning it rose and marched away
without entring the same or touching one apple, although they were full-ripe and very
delicious; So that when the owner came he found the full number of his apples! I should
be glad that our Youths, in steade of the time they employ about less profitable
peregrinations, and less honorable apprentiships, would bestow one moity in seeing and
observing the wars that happen on the sea under some good Captain or excellent
commander of Malta; the other moity in learning and surveying the discipline of the
Turkish armies. For it has many differences and advantages over ours. This ensueth that
here our Soldiers become more licentious in expeditions, that they prove more
circumspect and fearfully wary. For small offences and petty larcenies, which in times of
peace are in the common people punished with whipping and bastonadoes, in times of
war are capital crimes. For an egge taken by a Turke without paying, he is by their law
to have the full number of fifty stripes with a cudgell. For every other thing, how sleight
soever, not necessary for mans feeding, even for very trifles, they are either thrust through
with a sharpe stake, which they call Empaling, or presently beheaded. I have been
amazed reading the story of Selim, the cruellest Conqueror that ever was, to see, at what
time he subdued the country of Egypt, the beauteous gardens round about Damasco, all
open and in a conquered country, his main army lying encamped about, those gardens

were left untouched and unspoyled by the hands of his Soldiers, only because they were
commanded to spoyle nothing, and had not the watch-word of pillage. But is there any
malady in a Common-weale that deserveth to be combated by so mortal drug? No,
said Favonius, not so much as the usurpation of the tyranicall possession of a
Commonwealth. Plato likewise is not willing one should offer violence to the quiet repose
of his Countrey, no not to reforme or cure the same; and alloweth not that reformation
which disturbeth or hazardeth the whole estate; and which is purchased with the blood and
ruine of the Citizens. Establishing the office of an honest man, in these causes, to leave all
there: But only to pray God to lend his extraordinary assisting hand unto it; And seems
to be offended with Dyon his great friend, to have therein proceeded somewhat otherwise.
I was a Platonist on that side before ever I knew there had been a Plato in the world. And
if such a man ought absolutely be banished our commerce and refused our society (he who
for the sincerity of his conscience deserved by meane of divine favor, athwart the
public darknesse, and through the general ignorance of the world wherein he lived, so
far to enter and so deeply to penetrate into Christian light), I do not think that it
befitteth us to be instructed by a Pagan. Oh what impiety is it to expect from God no
succour simply his, and without our cooperation. I often doubt whether amongst so many
men that meddle with such a matter, any has been found of so weake an understanding,
that has earnestly been persuaded, he proceeded toward reformation by the utmost of
deformations; that he drew toward his salvation by the most express causes, that we have
of undoubted damnation; that overthrowing policy, disgracing magistrates, abusing laws,
under whose tuition God has placed him; filling brotherly minds and loving hearts with
malice, hatred and murther; calling the Divels and furies to his helpe; he may bring
assistance to the most sacred mildness and justice of divine Law. Ambition, avarice,
cruelty and revenge have not sufficient proppes and natural impetuousity; let us allure
and serve them up by the glorious title of justice and devotion. There can no worse estate
of things be imagined than where wickednesse commeth to be lawfull, And with the
Magistrates leave to take the cloake of virtue: Nihil in speciem fallicius, quam prava
religio, ubi deorum numen prætenditur sceleribus: ’There is nothing more deceiptfull to
show than corrupt religion, when the power of Heaven is made a pretence and cloake for
wickednesse.’ The extreme kind of injustice (according to Plato) is, that that which is
unjust should be held for just. The common people suffered therein greatly then, not only
present losses,
-----undique totis.
Usque adeo turbatur agris ---
----- Such revell and tumultuous rout
In all the country round about.
But also succeeding dammages. The living were faine to suffer, so did such as then were
scarce borne. They were robbed and pilled, and by consequence so was I, even of hope;
spoiling and depriving them of all they had to provide their living for many years to

come.
Quæ nequeunt secum ferre aut abduce re, perdunt,
Et cremat insontes turba scelesta casas
Muris nulla fides, squalent popularibus agri.
They wretch-less spoyle and spill what draw or drive they may not,
Guilty rogues to set fire on guilt-less houses stay not.
In wals no trust, the field
By spoyle growes waste and wild.
Besides these mischiefes I endured some others. I incurred the inconveniences that
moderation bringeth in such diseases. I was shaven on all hands. To the Ghibelin I was a
Guelf, to Guelf a Ghibelin. Some one of my Poets expresseth as much, but I wot not
where it is. The situation of my house, and the acquaintance of such as dwelt round about
me, presented me with one visage; my life and actions with another. No formall
accusations were made of it, for there was nothing to take hold of. I never opposed my
self against the laws, and who had called me in question should have lost by the
bargaine. They were mute suspicions that ranne under hand, which never want apparance
in so confused a burly-burly, no more than lacke of envious or foolish wits. I commonly
affoord ayde unto injurious presumption that fortune scattereth against me; by a fashion I
never had, to avoid justifying, excusing, or interpreting my self; deeming it to be a
putting of my conscience to compromise, to pleade for her: Perspicuitas enim,
argumentatione elevatur: ’For the cleering of a cause is lessened by the arguing.’ And as
if every man saw into me as clear as I do my self, in lieu of withdrawing, I advance
my self to the accusation and rather endeare it by an erroneous and scoffing confession,
except I flatly hold my peace as of a thing unworthy any answer. But such as take it for an
over-proud confidence, do not much less disesteeme and hate me for it, then such as
take it for weaknesse of an indefensible cause; Namely, the great, with whom want of
submission, is the extreme fault. Rude to all justice, that is known or felt; not demiss,
humble, or suppliant, I have often stumbled against that piller. So it is, that by the harmes
which befell me, an ambitious man would have hanged himself; and so would a
covetous churle. I have no care at all to acquire or get.
Sit mihi quod nunc est, etiam minus, ut mihi vivam
Quod superest ævi, si quid superesse volent dii. -- HOR.i. Epist. xviii. 107.
Let me have that I have, or less, so I may live
Unto my self the rest , if any rest God give.
But losses that come unto me by others injury, be it larceny or violence, pinch me in a
manner as one sicke and tortured with avarice. An offence causeth undoubtedly more

grief and sharpnesse than a loss. A thousand severall kindes of mischiefes fell upon me
one in the necke of another: I should more stoutly have endured them had they come all at
once. I bethought my self amongst my friends, to whom I might commit a needy, a
defective and unfortunate olde age; but after I had surveyed them all, and cast mine eyes
every where, I found my self bare and far to seek. For one to sowse himself down
headlong, and from so great a height, he should heedily fore-cast that it may be in the
arms of a solid, stedfast, vigorous and fortunate affection. They are rare, if there be any.
In the end I perceived the best and safest way was to trust both my self and my necessity
unto my self. And if it should happen to be but meanly and faintly in Fortunes grace, I
might more effectually recommend my self unto my own favor, more closely fasten
and more neerely looke unto my self. In all things men rely upon strange props, to spare
their own; only certain and only powerfull, know they but how to arm themselves
with them. Every man runneth out and unto what is to come, because no man is yet come
into himself. And I resolved that they were profitable inconveniences, forasmuch as
when reason will not serve, we must first warne towards Scholars with the rod; as with
fire and violence of wedges, we bring a crooked peece of wood to be straight. It is long
since I call to keep my self unto my self, and live sequestered from alien and strange
things, notwithstanding a daily start out and cast mine eyes aside. Inclination, a great
man’s favorable word, a kind looke does tempt me. God he knows whether there be penury
of them now-adayes, and what sense they bear. I likewise, without frowning, listen to the
subornings, framed to draw me to some town of merchandise or city of trafficke; and so
coldly defend my self that it seems I should rather endure to be overcome than not. Now
to a spirit so indocile blowes are required; and this vessell, that of itself is so ready to
warpe, to unhoope, to escape and fall in peeces, must be closed, hooped and strongly
knockt with an adze. Secondly, that this accident served me as an exercitation to prepare
my self for worse, if worse might happen, if I, who both by the benefit of fortune and
condition of my maners, hoped to be of the last, should by this tempest be one of the first
surprised; Instructing my self betimes to force my life, and frame it for a new state. True-
perfect liberty is for one to be able to do and work all things upon himself.
Potentissimus est qui se habet in potestate. (SEN. Epist. ix.) ’He is of most power that
keepes himself in his own power.’ In ordinary and peacefull times a man prepares
himself for common and moderate accidents; but in this confusion wherein we have
been these thirty yeeres, every French man, be it in general or in particular, does hourely
see himself upon the point of his fortunes overthrow and down-fall. By so much more
ought each one have his courage stored and his mind fraughted, with more strong and
vigorous provisions. Let us thanke Fortune, that has not made us live in an effeminate,
idle, and languishing age; Some, whom other means could never bring unto it, shall make
themselves famous by their misfortune. As I read not much in Histories, these confusions
of other states, without regret, that I could not better them present; So does my curiosity
make me somewhat please my self with mine eyes to see this notable spectacle of our
public death; her symptomes and formes. And since I could not hinder the same, I am
content to be appointed as an assistant unto it, and therby instruct my self. Yet seek we
evidently to know in shadowes and understand by fabulous representations upon Theaters,

to show of the tragicke revolutions of humane fortune. It is not without compassion of that
we hear, but we please ourselves to rowze up our displeasure by the rarenesse of these
pitifull events. Nothing tickles that pincheth not; and good Historians avoid calme
narrations, as a dead water or mort-mere, to retreeve seditions and find out wars,
whereto they know we cal them. I doubt whether I may lawfully avow at how base a rate
of my lifes rest and tranquility I have past it more than half, in the ruine of my Country. In
accidents that touch me not in my freehold I purchase patience very cheape; and to
complain to my self I respect not so much what is taken from me, as what is left me
both within and without. There is comfort in sometimes eschewing one and sometimes
another of the evills, that one in the necke of another surprise us, and elsewhere strike us
round about. As matters of public interrests, according as my affection is more
universally scattered, she is thereby more enfeebled. Since it is halfe true: Tantum ex
publicis malis sentimus, quantum ad privatas res pertinet. ’We feel so much of common
harmes as appertaine to our private estate.’ And that the health whence we fell was such
that herself solaceth the regret we should have for her. It was health, mary but in
comparison of the contagion, which has followed the same. We are not falen very high.
The corruption and the brigandage which now is in office and dignity seems to me the
least tolerable. We are less injuriously robbed in the midst of a wood then a place of
security. It was an universall coherency of members spoiled avie one another, and most of
them, with old-rankled ulcers, which neither admitted nor demaunded recovery. Truely
this shaking-fit did therefore more animate then deterre me, only by the aide of my
conscience, which not only quietly but fiercely carried itself; and I found no cause to
complain of my self. Likewise, as God never sends men either evils or goods absolutely
pure, my health held out well for that time, indeed against her ordinary; and as without it I
can do nothing, so with it, there are few things I cannot do. She gave me means to
summon and rouze up all my provisions, and to bear my hand before my hurt, which
happily would have gone further; And proved in my patience that yet I had some hold
against fortune, and that to thrust me out of my saddle there was required a stronger
counterbuffe. This I speak not to provoke her to give me a more vigorous charge. I am
her servant, and yield my self unto her: For Gods sake let her be pleased. Demaund you
whether I feel her assaults? I do indeede. As those whom sorrow possesseth and
overwhelmeth do notwithstanding at one time or other suffer themselves by intermissions
to be touched by some pleasure, and now and then smile. I have sufficient power over my
self to make mine ordinary state quiet and free from all tedious and irkesome
imaginations; but yet I sometimes suffer my self by starts to be surprised with the
pinchings of these unpleasant conceits, which while I arm my self to expell or wrestle
against them assaile and beate me. See here another huddle or tide of mischief, that on
the necke of the former came rushing upon me. Both within and round about my house, I
was overtaken, in respect of all other, with a most contagious pestilence. For, as soundest
bodies are subject to grievous diseases, because they only can force them; so the aire
about me being very healthy, wher in no mans memory infection (although very near)
could ever take footing, coming now to be poisoned, brought forth strange effects.

Mista senum et juvenum densantur funera nullum
Sæva caput Proserpina fugit. -- HOR. Car. i. Od. xxviii. 19.
Of old and young thicke funerals are shared
By cruel Proserpine no head is spared.
I was faine to endure this strange condition, that the sight of my house was irkesome
unto me. Whatever was therein lay all at randon, no man looked thereunto, and was free
for any that had a mind unto it. I who have so long been a good housekeeper, and used
to hospitality was much troubled and put to my shifts, how to find out some retreate for
my family, a dismaied and scattered family, making both herself and her friends afraide,
and breeding horrour where it sought to retire for shelter, being now to shift and change
her dwelling; so soone as any of the company beganne to feel his finger ake, all the rest
were dismaied. Every sicknesse is then taken for the plague: none has leisure to consider
them. And the mischief is, that according to rules of arte, what danger soever approcheth,
a man must continue forty dayes in anxiety or fear of that evil; in which time your own
imagination does perplex you as she list and infect your health. All which had much less
touched me, had I not been forced to bear other mens burthens and partake all their
grievances, and for six months space in miserable manner to be a woefull guide to so great-
confused a Caravane. For I ever carry my preservatives above me which are resolution
and sufferance. Apprehension does not greatly press me, which is particularly feared in
this sicknesse. And if, being alone I should have taken it, it had been a stronger and
further flight. It is a death, in my opinion, not of the worst: it is commonly short and
speeding, voide of lingring pain, comforted by the public condition; without ceremony,
without mourning, and without thronging. But for the people about us, the hundreth part
of soules cannot be saved.
------ videas desertaque regna
Pastorum, et longe saltus lati que vacantes.
Kingdomes of Shepherds desolate, forlorn,
Parkes far and near lie waste, a state all torn.
In that place my best revenue is manuall: what a hundred men laboured for me lay
fallow for a long time. What examples of resolution saw we not then in all this peoples
simplicity? Each one generally renounced all care of life. The grapes (which are the
countries chief commodities hung still and rotted upon the vines untouch’t; all
indifferently preparing themselves, and expecting death either that night or the next
morrow; with countenance and voice so little daunted, that they seemed to have
compromitted to this necessitie, and that it was an universall and inevitable condemnation.
It is ever such. But what slender hold has the resolution of dying? The difference and
distance of some few hours; the only consideration of the company yields the

apprehension diverse unto us. Behold these because they die in one same month, children,
yong, old; they are no more astonied, they are no longer wept-for. I saw some that feared
to stay behinde, as if they had been in some horrible solitude. And commonly I knew no
other care amongst them but for graves; it much grieved them to see the dead carcasses
scattered over the fields, at the mercy of wild beasts, which presently began to flocke
thither. Oh how humane fantasies differ and are easily disjoined! The Neorites, a nation
whilome subdued by Alexander the Great, cast out their dead mens bodies into the thickest
of their woods, there to be devoured, the grave only esteemed happy among them. Some
in good health digged already their graves, othersome yet living did go into them; And a
day-labourer of mine, as he was dying, with his own hands and feet pulled earth upon
him, and so covered himself. Was not this a lying down in the shade to sleepe at ease?
An enterprise in some sort as highly noble as that of some Roman Soldiers, who, after
the battle of Canna, were found with their heads in certain holes or pits, which
themselves had made, and filled up with their hands, wherein they were smothered. To
conclude, a whole nation was presently by use brought to a march, that in undantednesse
yields not to any consulted and fore-meditated resolution. The greatest number of
learnings instructions, to encourage us have more show then force, and more ornament
then fruit. We have forsaken nature, and yet we will teach her her lesson; Shee, that lead
us so happily, and directed us so safely. And in the means while, the traces of her
instructions and that little which by the benefit of ignorance remaineth of her image,
imprinted in the life of this rusticall troupe of unpolished men; learning is compelled to
go daily a borrowing, thereby to make her disciples a patterne of constancy, of
innocency, and of tranquilitie. It is a goodly matter to see how these men full of so great
knowledge, must imitate this foolish simplicitie, indeed in the first and chief actions of
virtue. And that our wisdom should learne of beasts the most profitable documents
belonging to the chiefest and most necessary parts of our life. How we should live and die,
husband our goods, love and bring up our children, and entertain justice. A singular
testimony of mans infirmitie, and that this reason we so manage at our pleasure, ever
finding some diversitie and noveltie, leaveth unto us no manner of apparant tracke of
nature. Wherewith men have done as perfumers do with oyle, they have adulterated her
with so many argumentations and sofisticated her with so diverse far-fetcht discourses,
that she is become variable and peculiar to every man, and has lost her proper, constant,
and universall visage; whereof we must seek for a testimony of beasts, not subject to
favor or corruption, nor to diversity of opinions. For it is most true that themselves march
not alwaies exactly in natures path, but if they chance to stray, it is so little that you may
ever the perceive the tracke; Even as horses led by hand do sometimes bound and start
out of the way, but no further then their halters length, and nevertheless follow ever his
steps that leadeth them; And as a Hawke takes his flight but under the limits of her cranes
or twyne. Exilia, tormenta, bella, morbos, naufragia, meditare, ut nullo sis malo tyro:
’Banishments, torments, wars, sicknesses, shipwracks, all these fore-cast and
premeditate, that you mayest seem no novice, no freshwater souldier to any
misadventure.’ What availeth this curiosity unto us, to preoccupate all humane natures
inconveniences, and with so much labor and toyling against them to prepare ourselves,

which perhaps shall nothing concern us? (Parem passis tristitiam facit, pati posse: ’It
makes men as sad that they may suffer some mischiefs as if they had suffred it.’ Not only
the blow, but the winde and cracke strikes us.) Or as the most febricitant, for surely it is a
kind of fever, now to cause your self to be whipped because fortune may one day
chance to make you endure it; and at Mid-Sommer to put-on your furr’d Gowne, because
you shall neede it at Christmas? Cast yourselves into the experience of all the mischiefes
that may befall you, namely of the extreamest; there try your self (say they), there assure
your self. Contrariwise, the easiest and most natural were even to discharge his thought
of them. They will not come soone enough, their true being does not last us long enough,
our spirit must extend and lengthen them, and before-hand incorporate them into himself,
and therewith entertaine himself, as if they lay not sufficiently heavy on our senses. They
will weigh heavy enough when they shall be there (says one of the maisters, not of a
tender, but of the hardest Sect); meane while favor your self; Beleeve what you lovest
best. What availes it you to collect and prevent your ill fortune, and for fear of the future
lose the present; and now to be miserable because in time you mayest be so? They are his
own words. Learning does us willingly one good office, exactly to instruct us in the
demensions of evils.
Curis acuens mortalia corda.
Mens cogitations whetting,
With sharpe cares inly fretting.
It were pity any part of their greatness should escape our feeling and understanding. It
is certain that preparation unto death has caused more torment unto most than the very
sufferance. It was whilome truely said of and by a most judicious Authour: Minus afficit
sensus fatigatio, quam cogitatio: ’Wearinesse less troubleth our senses then pensivenesse
does.’ The apprehension of present death does sometimes of itself animate us with a
ready resolution no longer to avoide a thing altogether inevitable. Many Gladiators have
in former ages been seen, having at first fought very cowardly, most courageously to
embrace death; offering their throate to the enemies sword, indeed bidde them make
haste. The sight distant from future death has neede of a slowe constancy, and by
consequence hard to be found. If you know not how to die, take no care for it; Nature her
self will fully and sufficiently teach you in the nicke, she will exactly discharge that
work for you; trouble not your self with it.
Incertam frustra, mortales, funeris horam
Quæritis, et qua sit mors aditura via:
Poena minor certam subito prefer ruinam;
Quod timeas, gravius sutiniuisse diu. -- CATUL. Eleg. i. 29, 16.
Of death the uncertaine hour you men in vain

Enquire, and what way death shall you destraine:
A certain sodaine ruine is less pain,
More grievous long what you fear to sustain.
We trouble death with the care of life, and life with the care of death. The one annoyeth,
the other affrights us. It is not against death we prepare ourselves, it is a thing too
momentary. A quarter of an hour of passion without consequence and without annoyance
deserves not particular precepts. To say we prepare ourselves against the preparations of
death. Philosophy teacheth us ever to have death before our eyes, to fore-see and consider
it before it come; Then gives us rules and precautions so to provide, that such foresight
and thought hurt us not. So do Phisitions, who cast up into diseases that they may employ
their drugges and skill about them. If we have not known how to live, it is injustice to
teach us how to die, and deforme the end from all the rest. Have we known how to live
constantly and quietly, we shall know how to die resolutely and reposedly. They may
bragge as much as they please. Tota Philosophorum vita commentatio mortis est: ’The
whole life of a Philosopher is the meditation of his death.’ But me thinkes it is indeede the
end, yet not the scope of life. It is her last, it is her extremity, not her object. Hir self must
be unto herself, her aime, her drift, and her designe. Hir direct studie is to order, to direct,
and to suffer herself. In the number of many other offices which the general and
principal Chapter to know how to live containeth, is this speciall Article, ’To know how to
die.’ And of the easiest, did not our own fear weigh it down. To judge them by their
profit and by the naked truth, the lessons of simplicity yield not much to those which
Doctrine preacheth to the contrary unto us. Men are different in feeling and diverse in
force; they must be directed to their good according to themselves, and by diverse waies:
Quo me cumque rapit tempestas, deferor hospes. -- HOR. i. Epist. i. 15.
Where I am whirld by winde and wether,
I guest-like straight am carried thether.
I never saw meane paisant of my neighbors, enter into cogitation or care with what
assurance or countenance he should pass this last hour. Nature teacheth him never to
muze on death but when be dieth. And then has he a better grace in it than Aristotle,
whom death perpelexed doubly both by herself and by so long a premeditiation.
Therefore was it Cæsars opinion that ’The least premeditated death was the happiest and
easiest.’ Plus dolet quam necesse est, qui ante dolet quam necesse est: ’He grieves more
than be need, That grieves before he neede.’ The sharpenesse of this imagination proceeds
from our curiosity. Thus we ever hinder ourselves, desiring to fore-run and sway
natural prescriptions. It is but for Doctors being in health to fare the worse by it, and to
frowne and startle at the Image of death. The vulgar sort have neither neede of remedy nor
comfort, but when the shock or stroke commeth. And justly considers no more of it than
he feeleth. And is it not as we say, that the vulgare stupidity and want of apprehension
affoorde them this patience in private evils, and this deepe carelesnes of sinister future

accidents? That their mind being more grosse, dull and blockish, is less penetrable and
agitable? In Gods name, if it be so, let us henceforth keep a schoole of brutality. It is the
utmost fruit that Sciences promise unto us, to which she so gently bringeth her disciples.
We shall not want good teachers, interp reters of natural simplicity. Socrates shall be one;
For, as neare as I remember, he speaks in this sense [to]the Judges that determine of his
life: ’I fear me, my Maisters’ (says he), ’that if I entreate you not to make me die, I shall
confirme the evidence of my accusers, which is, That I professe to have more
understanding than others, as having some knowledge more secret and hid of things both
above and beneath us. I know I have neither frequented nor known death, nor have I
seen any body that has either felt or tried her qualities to instruct me in them. Those
who fear her presuppose to know; As for me, I neither know who or what she is, nor what
they do in the other world. Death may perhaps be a thing indifferent, happily a
thing desirable. Yet it is to be beleeved that if it be a transmigration from one place to
another, there is some amendment in going to live with so many worthy famous persons
that are deceased, and be exempted from having any more to do with wicked and
corrupted Judges. If it be a consummation of ones being, it is also an amendment and
entrance into a long and quiet night. We find nothing so sweet in life as a quiet rest
and gentle sleepe, and without dreames. The things I know to be wicked, as to wrong or
offend ones neighbour, and to disobey his superiour, be he God or man, I carefully shunne
them; Such as I know not whether they be good or bad, I cannot fear them. If I go to my
death, and leave you alive, The Gods only see, whether you or I shall prosper best; and
therefore, for my regarde, you shall dispose of it as it shall best please you. But
acccording to my fashion, which is to counsell good and profitable things, this I say, that
for your own conscience you shall do best to free and discharge me; except you see
further into my own cause than my self. And judging according to my former actions,
both public and private, according to my intentions; and to the profit, that so many of
our Citizens, both young and olde, draw dayly from my conversation, and the fruit, all you
reape by me, you cannot more justly or duely discharge yourselves toward my desertes
than by appointing (my poverty considered) that I may live,and at the common charge be
kept, in the Prytaneo, which for much less reasons I have often seen you freely graunt to
others. Impute it not to obstinacy or disdaine in me, nor take it in ill part, that i, according
to custom, precede not by way of i ntreatie, and moove you to commiseration. I have both
friends and kinsfolk, being not (as Homer says) begotten of a blocke or stone, no more
than other men, capable to present themselves humbly suing with tears and mourning;
and I have three desolate, wailing children to move you to pittie. But I should make your
City ashamed of the age I am in, and in that reputation of wisdom, as now I stand in
prevention to yield unto so base an abject countenances. What would the world say of
other Athenians? I have ever admonished such as have heard me speak, never to
purchase or redeeme their life by any dishonest or unlawfull act. And in my countries
wars, both at Amphipolis, at Potidea, at Delia, and others, in which I have been, I have
shewen by effects how far I was from warranting my safety by my shame. Moreover, I
should interest your duty, and prejudice your calling, and persuade you to foul unlawfull
things; for, not my prayers, but the pure and solid reasons of justice should persuade you.

You have sworne to the Gods so to maintaine yourselves. Not to believe there were any,
might seem I would suspect, recriminate, or retorte the fault upon you. And my self
should witness against my self, not to believe in them as I ought, distrusting their
conduct, and not meerely remitting my affairs into their hands. I wholly trust and rely on
them, and certainely holde that in this they will dispose as it shall be meetest for you and
fittest for me. Honest men, that neither live nor are dead, have no cause at all to fear the
Gods.’ Is not this a childish pleading of an unimaginable courage, and in what necessity
employed? Verily it was reason he should prefer it before that which the great Orator
Lysias had set down in writing for him, excellently fashioned in a judiciary Stile, but
unworthy of so noble a criminall. Should a man have heard an humbly-suing voice out of
Socrates his mouth? Would that proud virtue have failed in the best of her show? And
would his rich and powerfull nature have committed her defense unto arte, and in her
highest Essay renounced unto truth and sinceritie the ornaments of his speech, to adorn
and decke himself with the embellishment of the figures and fictions of a fore-learn’t
Oration? He did most wisely, and according to himself, not to corrupt the tenure of an
incorruptible life, and so sacred an image of human form, to prolong his decrepitude for
one yeere, and wrong the immortall memory of so glorious an end. He ought his life, not
to himself, but to the worlds example. Had it not been a public loss if he had finished
the same in some idle, base and obscure manner? Truely so carelesse and effeminate a
consideration of his death deserved posterity should so much more consider the same for
him; which it did. And nothing is so just in justice as that which fortune ordained for his
commendation. For the Athenians did afterward so detest and abhorre those which had
furthered and caused his death, that of all they were loathed and shunned as cursed and
excommunicated men; what soever they had but touched was held to be polluted; No man
would so much as wash with them in bathes or hot houses; no man affoord them a
salutation, much less accost or have to do with them; so that, being in the end no longer
able to endure this public hatred and general contempt, they all hanged themselves. If
any man thinkes that amongst so many examples I might have chosen for the service of
my purpose in Socrates his sayings, I have chosen or handled this but ill; and deemeth this
discourse to be raised above common opinions, I have done it wittingly: for I judge
otherwise, and hold it to be a discourse in rank and sincerity much shorter and lower
then vulgar opinions. It representeth in an unartificiall boldness and infantine security,
the pure impression and first ignorance of nature. Because it is credible that we naturally
fear pain, but not death, by reason of her. It is a part of our being no less essentiall than
life. To what end would Nature have else engendred the hate and horror of it, seeing it
holdes therein, and with it a rank of most great profit, to foster the succession and
nourish the vicissitude of her works? And that in this universall Common-weale it
steadeth and serveth more for birth and augmentation, then for loss, decay, or ruine.
Sic rerum summa novatur. -- LUCR. ii. 73.
So does the summe of all,
By courses rise and fall.

Mille animas una necata dedit.
We thousand soules shall pay
For one soul made away.
The decay of one life is the passage to a thousand other lives. Nature has imprinted in
beasts the care of themselves and of their preservation. They proceede even to the fear of
their empairing, to shocke or hurt themselves, and that we should not shackle or beate
them, accidents subject to th eir sense and experience. But that we should kill them, they
cannot fear it, nor have they the faculty to imagine or conclude their death. Yet it is
reported that they are not seen only to embrace and endure the same joyfully (most
Horses neigh in dying, and Swannes sing when it seiseth them), But, moreover, they seek
it when they neede it, as by diverse examples may be prooved in the Elephants. Besides,
the manner of arguing which Socrates useth here, is it not equally admirable both in simpli
citie and in vehemence? Verily, It is much easier to speak as Aristotle and live as Cæsar,
than speak and live as Socrates. Therein consists the extreme degree of difficulty and
perfection; arte cannot attaine unto it. Our faculties are not now so addressed; We neither
assay nor know them; we invest ourselves with others, and suffer our own to be idle. As
by some might be said of me, that here I have but gathered a nosegay of strange floures,
and have put nothing of mine unto it but the thred to binde them. Certes, I have given unto
public opinion that these borrowed ornaments accompany me, but I meane not they
should cover or hide me; it is contrary to mine intention, who would make show of
nothing that is not my own, indeed my own by nature. And had I believed my self, at
all adventure I had spoken alone. I dayly charge my self the more beyond my proposition
and first form, upon the fantasie of time, and through idlenesse. If it mis-seem me, as I
think it does, it is no great matter; it may be profitable for some other. Some alleadge
Plato, some mention Homer, that never saw them; or, as they say in English, many a man
speaks of Robin Hood that never shot in his bow; And I have taken diverse passages from
others then in their spring. Without pain or sufficiency, having a thousand volumes of
bookes about me where now I write, if I please I may presently borrow from a number of
such botcherly-patchcotes (men that I plod not much upon) wherewith to enamell this
treaty of Physiognomie. I need but the liminary epistle of a Germane to store me with
allegations, and we go questing that way for a fading greedy glory to cousin and delude
the foolish world. These rapsodies of common-places, wherewith so many stuffe their
study, serve not greatly but for vulgar subjects, and serve but to show and not to direct us:
A ridiculous-foolish fruite of learning that Socrates does so pleasantly enveigh and exagirate
against Euthydemus. I have seen bookes made of things neither studied nor ever
understood, the author coming to diverse of his learned and wise friends in the search of
this and that matter, that so he might compile them into a book, contenting himself for
his own part to have cast the plot and projected the design of it, and by his industry to
have bound up the fagot of unknown provisions; at least is the inke and paper his own.
This may be said to be a buying or borrowing and not a making or compiling of a
book. It is to teach men, not that one can make a book, but to put them out of doubt that
he cannot make it. A president of the law in a place where I was vanted himself to have
hudled up together two hundred and od strange places in a presidential law-case of his: In
publishing of which he defaced the glory which others gave him for it: A weake, childish
and absurd boasting, in my opinion, for such a subject and for such a man. I do cleane
contrary, and amongst so many borrowings am indeed glad to filch some one, disguising
and altering the same to some new service. On hazard, to let men say that it is for lacke of
understanding its natural use, I give it some particular addressing of my own hand, to
the end it may be so much less meerely strange; Whereas these put their larcenies to
pubIike view and garish show; so have they more credit in the laws then I. We other
naturalists suppose th at there is a great and incomparable preference betweene the honor
of invention and that of allegation; Would I have spoken according to learning, I had
spoken sooner, I had written at such times as I was nearer to my studies, when I had more
wit and more memory, and should more have trusted the vigor of that age then the
imperfection of this had I been willing to professe writing of bookes. And what if this
gratious favor, which fortune has not long since offered me by the intermission of this
work, could have befalne me in such a season in liew of this, where it is equally
desireable to possesse and ready to loose?
Two of mine acquaintance (both notable men in this faculty) have, in my conceit, lost
much because they refused to publish themselves at forty years of age, to stay until they
were three score. Maturity has her defects as well as greenenesse, and worse. And as
incommodious or unfit is old age unto this kind of work as to any other. Whosoever
puts his decrepitude under the press committeth folly, if therby he hopes to wring out
humors that shall not taste of dotage, of foppery, or of drousinesse. Our spirit becomes
costive and thickens in growing old. Of ignorance I speak sumptuously and plenteously,
and of learning meagerly and pitiously; This accessorily and accidentally, that expressely
and principally; And purposely I treat of nothing but of nothing, nor of any one science
but of unscience. I have chosen the time where the life I have to set forth is all before me,
the rest holds more of death. And of my death only should I find it babling, as others
do, I would willingly, in dislodging, give the World advise. Socrates has been a perfect
patterne in all great qualities, I am vexed that ever he met with so unhandsome and
crabbed a body as they say he had, and so dissonant from the beauty of his mind:
Himselfe so amorous and so besotted on beauty. Nature did him wrong. There is no thing
more truely-semblable as the conformity or relation betweene the body and the mind.
Ipsi animi, magni refert, quali in corpore locati sint; multa enim e corpore existunt quæ
acuant mentem, multa quæ obtundant: ’It is of great import in what body the mind is
bestowed, for many things arise of the body to sharpen the mind, and many things to dull
and rebate it.’ This man speaks of an unnaturall ill-favourdnesse and membrall
deformity, but we call ill-favourdnesse a kind of unseemelinesse at the first sight, which
chiefely lodgeth in the face, and by the colour worketh a dislike in us. A freckle, a
blemmish, a rude countenance, a sower looke, proceeding often of some inexplicable
cause, may be in well ordered, comely and compleate limbs. The foulenesse of face
which invested a beauteous mind in my dear friend La Boitie was of this predicament.
This superficiall ill-favourdnesse, which is notwithstanding to the most imperious, is of
less prejudice unto the state of the mind, and has small certainty in mens opinion. The
other, by a more proper name called a more substantiall deformity, beareth commonly a
deeper inward stroke. Not every shooe of smoothshining leather, but every well-shapen
and handsome-made shoe, sheweth the inward and right shape of the foote. As Socrates
said of his, that it justly accused so much in his mind had he not corrected the same by
institution; But in so saying I suppose, that according to his wonted use he did but jest,
and so excellent mind did never frame itself; I cannot often enough repeat how much I
esteeme beauty, so powerfull and advantageous a quality is she. He named it a short
tyranny, and Plato the priviledge of Nature. We have none that exceeds it in credit; She
possesseth the chief rank in the commerce of society of men: She presents itself
forward, she seduceth and preoccupates our judgement with great authority and
wonderful impression. Phryne had lost her plea, though in the hands of an excellent
lawyer, if with opening her garments, by the sodaine flashing of her beauty she had not
corrupted her judges; And I find that Cyrus, Alexander, and Cæsar, those three Masters
of the World, have not forgotten or neglected the same in atchieving their great affairs;
so has not the first Scipio. One same word in Greeke importeth fair and good; And even
the Holy Ghost calleth often those good which he meaneth fair. I should willingly
maintaine the rank of the goods as employed the song which Plato says to have been
triviall, taken from some ancient Poet, Health, beauty and riches. Aristotle says that the
right of commanding does of duty belong to such as are fair and if perhaps any be found
whose beauty approached to that of the Gods images, that veneration is equally due unto
them. To one that asked him why the fairest were both longer time and oftner frequented,
’This question,’ quoth he, ’ought not to be mooved but by a blinde man.’ Most and the
greatest Philosophers paide for their schooling and attained unto Wisedome by the
intermission of their beauty, and favor of their comlines. Not only in men that serve me,
but in beasts also, I consider the same within two inches of goodnesse. Yet me thinkes that
the same feature and manner of the face, and those lineaments by which some argue
certain inward complexions and our future fortunes, is a thing that does not directly nor
simply lodge under the Chapter of beauty and favourdnesse, no more than all good
favors, or cleerenesse of aire do not alwayes promise health: nor all fogges and stinkes
infection in times of the plague. Such as accuse Ladies to contradict the beauty by their
manners, guesse not alwayes at the truth. For [an] ill favourd and ill composed face may
sometimes harbour some aire of probity and trust. As on the contrary I have sometimes
read between two fair eyes the threats of a maligne and dangerous ill-boding nature.
There are some favourable Physiognomies, For in a throng of victorious enemies you shall
presently ammiddest a multitude of unknown faces, make choise of one man more than
of others to yield your self unto and trust your life, and not properly by the consideration
of beauty. A mans looke or aire of his face is but a weake warrant, notwithstanding it is of
some consideration; And were I to whipe them I would more rudely scourge such as
maliciously belie and betray the promises which Nature had charactred in their front; And
more severely would I punish malicious craft in a debonaire apparance and in a mild
promising countenance. It seems there be some lucky and well boding faces, and other
some unlucky and ill presaging; And I think there is some Art to distinguish gently-mild
faces from nyæs and simple, the severe from the rude, the malicious from the froward, the
disdainful from the melancholike and other neighbouring qualities. There are some
beauties not only fierce-looking, but also sharpe working, some others pleasing-sweet
and yet wallowishly tastlesse. To prognosticate future successes of them be matters I leave
undecided. I have (as elsewhere I noted) taken for my regard this ancient precept, very
rawly and simply : That We cannot erre in following Nature; and that the sovereign
document is for a man to conforme himself to her. I have not (as Socrates), by the power
and virtue of reason, corrected my natural complexions, nor by Art hindered mine
inclination. Looke how I came into the World, so I go-on: I strive with nothing. My two
Mistris parts live of their own kindness in peace and good agreement; but my nurses
milke has (thankes be to God) been indifferently wholesome and temperate. Shall I say
thus much by the way? That I see a certain image of bookish or scholastical
preud’hommie only, which is in a manner in use amongst us, held and reputed in greater
esteeme than it deserveth, and which is but a servant unto precepts, brought under by
hope, and constrained by fear? I love it such as laws and religions make not, but over-
make and authorize; that they may be perceived to have wherewith to uphold herself
without other aide sprung up in us of her own proper roots, by and from the seed of
universall reason, imprinted in every man that is not unnaturall. The same reason that
reformeth Socrates from his vicious habite, yields him obedient both to Gods and men
that rule and command his City; courageous in his death, not because his soul is
immortall, but because he is mortal. A ruinous instruction to all common-weales, and
much more harmefull than ingenious and subtile, is that which perswadeth men that only
religious beliefe, and without manners, sufficeth to content and satisfie divine justice.
Custome makes us see an enormous distinction betweene devotion and conscience. I have
a favourable apparence, both in form and in interpretation.
Quid dixi habere me? Imo habui, Chreme:
Heu tantum attriti corporis ossa vides. -- TER. Heau. act i. sc. 1.
I have; what did I say?
I had what’s now away.
Alas, you only now behold
Bones of a body worne and old.
And which makes a contrary show to that of Socrates. It has often betided me that by
the simple credit of my presence and aspect, some that had no knowledge of me have
greatly trusted unto it, were it about their own affairs or mine. And even in forraine
countries, I have thereby reaped singular and rare favors. These two experiments are
perhaps worthy to be particularly related. A quidam gallant determined upon a time to
surprise both my house and my self. His plot was to come riding alone to my gate, and
instantly to urge entrance. I knew him by name, and had some reason to trust him, being
my neigbbour and somwhat alide unto me. I presently caused my gates to be opened, as I
do to all men. He comes-in all afrighted, his horse out of breath; both much harassed. He
entertaines me with this fable: that within halfe a league of my house he was sodainely set-
upon by an enemy of his whom I knew well, and had heard of their quarrell; that his foe
had wondrously put him to his spurres; that being surprised unarmed, and having fewer in
his company than the other, he was glad to run away, and for safety had made haste to
come to my house, as to his sanctuary; That he was much perplexed for his men, all which
he supposed to be either taken or slain. I endevoured friendly to comfort and sincerely to
warrant and refresh him. Within a while came galloping foure or five of his Soldiers,
amazed, as if they had been out of their wits, hasting to be let in. Shortly after came
others, and others, all proper men, well mounted, better armed, to the number of thirty or
there abouts, all seeming distracted for fear, as if the enemy that pursued them had been
at their heels. This mystery beganne to summon my suspicion. I was not ignorant of the
age wherein I lived, nor how much my house might be envied; and had sundry examples
of others of my acquaintance that had been spoiled, beset and surprised thus and thus. So
it is, that perceiving with my self, there was nothing to be gotten though I had begun to
use them kindly, if I continued not, and being unable to rid my self of them and clear
my house without danger and spoiling all; as I ever do, I took the plainest and most
natural well meaning way, and commanded they should be let-in and bid welcome. And
to say truth, I am by nature little suspicious or mistrustfull. I am easily drawen to admit
excuses and encline to mild interpretations. I take men according to common order, and
suppose everyone to meane as I do, and believe these perverse and trecherous
inclinations, except I be compelled by some authentic testimony, no more then
monsters or miracles. Besides I am a man that willingly commit my self unto fortune,
and carelesly cast my self unto her arms. Whereof hitherto I have more just cause to
commend my self than to complain. And have found her more circumspect and friendly-
careful of my affairs than I am my self. There are certain actions of my life, the
conduct of which may justly be termed difficult, or if any be so disposed, prudent. And of
those, suppose the third part of them to be my own, truely the other two are richly hirs.
We are to blame, and in my conceit we erre, that we do not sufficiently and so much as
we ought, trust the heavens with ourselves. And pretend more in our own conduct then
of right appertaines unto us. Therefore do our desseignes so often miscarry, and our
intents so seldom sort to wished effect. The heavens are angry, and I may say envious of
the extension and large priviledge we ascribe unto the right of humane wisdom, to the
prejudice of theirs: and abridge them so much the more unto us by how much more we
endeavor to amplifie them. But to come to my former discourse. These gallants kept still
on horsebacke in my court, and would not alight; their Captain with me in my hall, who
would never have his horse set-up, still saying that be would not stay, but must necessarily
withdraw himself so soon as he had news of his followers. He saw himself master of
his enterprise, and nothing was wanting but the execution. He has since reported very
often (for he was no whit scrupulous or afraid to tell this story) that my undaunted looks,
my undismaide countenance, and my liberty of speech made him reject all manner of
treasonable intents or trecherous desseignes. What shall I say more? He bids me farewell,
calleth for his horse, gets up, and offreth to be gone, his people having continually their
eyes fixed upon him, to observe his looks and see what signe be should make unto them;
much amazed to see him begone, and wondring to see him omit and forsake such an
advantage. An other time, trusting to a certain truce or cessation of arms that lately had
been published through our campes in France, as one suspecting no harme, I undertook
a journey from home, through a dangerous and very ticklish countrey. I had not rid far but
I was discovered, and behold three or foure troupes of horsemen, all severall ways, made
after me, with purpose to entrap me; One of which overtooke me the third day, where I
was round beset and charged by fifteene or twenty Gentlemen, who had all vizards and
cases, followed a loofe-off by a band of Argoletiers. I was charged; I yielded; I was taken
and immediately drawne into the bosome of a thicke Wood that was not far-off; there puld
from my horse, stripped with all speed, my truncks and clokebags rifled, my box taken,
my horses, my equipage, and such things as I had, dispersed and shared amongst them.
We continued a good while amongst those thorny bushes, contesting and striving about
my ransome, which they racked so high that it appeared well I was not much known of
them. They had long contestation among themselves for my life. And to say truth, there
were many circumstances threatned me of the danger I was in.
Tunc animis opus, Ænea, tuncpectore firmo. -- Virg. Æn. vi.
Of courage then indeed,
Then of stout brest is need.
I ever stood upon the title and priviledge of the truce and proclamation made in the King’s
name, but that availed not: I was content to quit them what ever they had taken from me,
which was not to be despised, without promising other ransome. After we had debated the
matter to and fro the space of two or three hours, and that no excuses could serve, they
set me upon a lame jade, which they knew could never escape them, and committed the
particular keeping of my person to fifteene or twenty harque-busiers, and dispersed my
people to others of their crew, commanding we should diverse ways be carried prisoners,
and my self being gone two or threescore paces from them,
Jam prece Pollucis, jam Castoris implorata, -- Catul. El. iv. 65.
Pollux and Castors aide,
When I had humbly praide,
behold a sodain and unexpected alteration took them. I saw their Captain coming
towards me, with a cheerful countenance and much milder speeches than before, carefully
trudging up and down through all the troops to find out my goods again, which as he
found al scattred he forced every man to restore them unto me; and even my boxe came to
my hands again. To conclude, the most precious jewell they presented me was in liberty;
as for my other things, I cared not greatly at that time. What the true cause of so unlookt-

for a change and so sodaine an alteration was, without any apparent impulsion, and of so
wonderful repentance, at such a time, in such an opportunity and such an enterprise, fore-
meditated, consulted and effected without controlement, and which through custom and
the impiety of times was now become lawfull (for at the first brunt I plainely confessed
and genuinly told them what side I was of, where my way lay, and whither I was riding), I
verily know not yet, nor can I give any reason for it. The chiefest amongst them unmasked
himself, told me his name, and repeated diverse times unto me that I should acknowledge
my deliverance to my countenance, to my boldness and constancy of speech, and be
beholding to them for it, insomuch as they made me unworthy of such a misfortune; and
demanded assurance of me for the like curtesie. It may be that the inscrutable goodnesse
of God would use this vain instrument for my preservation; For the next morrow it also
shielded me from worse mischief or amboscadoes, whereof themselves gently
forewarned me. The last is yet living, able to report the whole success himself; the other
was slain not long since. If my countenance had not answered for me, if the ingenuity of
mine inward intent might not plainely have been deciphered in mine eyes and voice,
surely I could never have continued so long without quarrels or offences: with this
indiscreete liberty, to speak freely (be it right or wrong) whatever commeth to my mind,
and rashly to judge of things. This fashion may in some sort (and that with reason) seem
uncivill and ill accommodated in our customa ry manners; but outrageous or malicious, I
could never meete with any would so judge it, or that was ever distasted at my liberty if he
received the same from my mouth. Words reported again have as another sound, so
another sense. And to say true, I hate no body; And am so remisse to offend, or slow to
wrong any, that for the service of reason itself I cannot do it. And if occasion have at
any time urged me in criminall condemnations to do as others, I have rather been
content to be amearced then to appeare. Ut magis peccari nolim, quam satis animi ad
vindicanda peccata habeam: ’So as I had rather men should not offend, then that I should
have courage enough to punish their offences.’ Some report that Aristotle, being up-
braided by some of his friends that he had been over mercifull toward a wicked man, ’I
have indeede (quoth he) been mercifull toward the man, but not toward his wickednesse.’
Ordinary judgements are exasperated unto punishment by the horror of the crime; And
that enmildens me. The horror of the first murther makes me fear a second; And the
uglinesse of one cruelty induceth me to detest all manner of imitation of it. To me, that am
but a plaine fellow and see no higher than a steeple, may that concerne which was
reported of Charillus, King of Sparta: ’He cannot be good, since he is not bad to the
wicked.’ Or thus; for Plutarke presents it two ways, as he does a thousand other things
diversly and contrary; ’He must needs be good, since he is so to the wicked.’ Even as in
lawfull actions it grieves me to take any paines about them, when it is with such as are
therewith displeased; So, to say truth, in unlawfull, I make no great conscience to employ
my self or take paines about them, being with such as consent unto them.





CHAPTER XIII: OF EXPERIENCE
HERE IS no desire more natural then that of knowledge. We attempt
all means that may bring us unto it. When reason failes us, we employ
experience.
Per varios usus artem experientia fecit,
Exemplo monstrante viam. -- MANIL. i. Ast. 61.
By diverse proofes experience art has bred,
Whilst one by one the way examples led.
Which is a meane by much more weake and vile. But truth is of so great consequence
that we ought not disdaine any induction that may bring us unto it. Reason has so many
shapes that we know not which to take hold of. Experience has as many. The
consequence we seek to draw from the conference of events is unsure, because they are

ever dissemblable. No quality is so universall in this surface of things as variety and
diversity. The Greekes, the Latines, and we, use for the most express examples of
similitude that of egges. Some have nevertheless been found, especially one in Delphos,
that knew markes of difference betweene egges, and never took one for another; And
having diverse hennes, could rightly judge which had laid the egge. Dissimilitude does of it
self insinuate into our workes, no arte can come near unto similitude. Neither Perozet
nor any other carde-maker can so industriously smoothe or whiten the backeside of his
cards, but some cunning gamester will distinguish them only by seeing some other
player handle or shuffle them. Resemblance does not so much make one as difference
maketh another. Nature has bound herself to make nothing that may not be
dissemblable. Yet does not the opinion of that man greatly please me, that supposed by
the multitude of laws to curbe the authority of judges in cutting out their morsels. He
perceived not that there is as much liberty and extension in the interpretation of laws as
in their fashion. And those but mocke themselves who think to diminish our debates and
stay them by calling us to the express word of sacred Bible. Because our spirit findes not
the field less spacious to controule and checke the sense of others then to represent his
own, and as if there were as litle courage and sharpnesse to glose as to invent. We see
how far he was deceived. For we have in France more laws then all the world besides;
indeed, more then were needefull to governe all the worlde imagined by Epicurus: Ut olim
flagitiis, sic nunc legibus laboramus: ’As in times past we were sicke of offences, so now
are we of laws.’ As we have given our judges so large a scope to moote, to opinionate, to
suppose, and decide, that there was never so powerfull and so licentious a liberty. What
have our lawmakers gained with chusing a hundred thousand kinds of particular cases,
and adde as many laws unto them? That number has no proportion with the infinite
diversity of humane accidents. The multiplying of our inventions shall never come to the
variation of examples. Adde a hundred times as many unto them, yet shall it not follow
that of events to come there be any one found that in all this infinite number of selected
and enregistred events shall meete with one to which be may so exactly join and match
it, but some circumstance and diversity will remaine that may require a diverse
consideration of judgement. There is but little relation betweene our actions that are in
perpetuall mutation and the fixed and unmoveable laws. The most to be desired are the
rarest, the simplest, and most general. And yet I believe it were better to have none at all
then so infinite a number as we have. Nature gives them ever more happy then those we
give ourselves. Witness the image of the golden age that Poets faine, and the state
wherein we see diverse nations to live, which have no other. Some there are who to decide
any controversie that may rise amongst them, will chuse for judge the first man that by
chance shall travell alongst their mountaines: Others, that upon a market day will name
some one amongst themselves who in the place without more wrangling shall determine
all their questions. What danger would ensue if the wisest should so decide ours according
to occurences and at the first sight, without being tied to examples and consequences? Let
every foote have his own shooe. Ferdinando, King of Spain, sending certain Colonies
into the Indies, provided wisely that no lawyers or students of the laws should be carried
thither, for fear lest controversies, sutes, or process should people that new found world.

As a Science that of her own nature engendreth altercation and division, judging with
Plato that Lawyers and Phisitions are an ill provision for any countrey.’ Wherefore is that
our common language, so easy to be understood in all other matters, becomes so
obscure, so harsh and so hard to be understood in law-cases, bils, contracts, indentures,
citations, wils, and testaments? And that he who so plainely expresseth himself, what
ever he spake or wrote of any other subject, in law matters findes no manner or way to
declare himself his meaning that admits not some doubt or contradiction; Unless it be
that the Princes of this art, applying themselves with a particular attention to lilve and
chose strange, choise, and solemn words, and frame artificiall cunning clauses, have so
plodded and poized every syllable, canvased and sifted so exquisitely every seame and
quiddity, that they are now so entangled and so confounded in the infinity of figures and
so several- small partitions, that they can no mor come within the compasse of any order,
or prescription or certain understanding. Confusum est quidquid usque in pulverem
sectum est: ’Whatsoever is sliced into very powder is confused.’
Whosoever has seen children labouring to reduce a masse of quick-silver to a
certain number, the more they press and work the same and strive to force it to their
will, so much more they provoke the liberty of that generous metall, which scorneth their
arte, and scatteringly disperseth itself beyond all imagination. Even so of lawyers, who
in subdividing their suttleties or quiddities, teach men to multiply doubts, and by
extending and diversifying difficufties, they lengthen and amplifie, they scatter and
disperse them. In sowing and retailing of questions they make the World to fructifie and
abound in uncertainty, in quarrels, in sutes, and in controversies. As the ground the more it
is crumbled, broken, and deeply removed or grupped up, becomes so much more
fertile. Difficultatent fecit doctrine: ’Learning breeds difficulty.’ We found many doubts in
Ulpian, we find more in Bartolus and Baldus. The trace of this innumerable diversity of
opinions should never have been used to adorn posterity and have it put in her head, but
rather have been utterly razed out. I know not what to say to it; but this is seen by
experience, that so many interpretations dissipate and confound all truth. Aristotle has
written to be understood: Which, if he could not, much less shall another not so learned
as he was; and a third, than he who treateth his own imagination. We open the matter,
and spill it in distempering it. Of one subject we make a thousand: And in multiplying and
subdividing we fal again into the infinity of Epicurus his Atomes. It was never seen that
two men judged likewise of one same thing: And it is impossible to see two opinions exactly
semblable, not only in diverse men, but in any one same man at severall hours. I
commonly find something to doubt of, where the commentary happily never deigned to
touch, as deeming it so plaine. I stumble sometimes as much in an even smooth path, as
some horses that I know who oftner trip in a fair plaine way than in a rough and stony.
Who would not say that glosses increase doubts and ignorance, since no book is to be
seen, whether divine or profane, commonly read of all men, whose interpretation dimmes
or tarnisheth not the difficulty? The hundred commentary sends him to his succeeder more
thorny and more crabbed than the first found him. When agreed we amongst ourselves to
say, this book is perfect; there’s now nothing to be said against it? This is best seen in
our French-pedling Law. Authority of Law is given to infinite Doctors, to infinite arrests,

and to as many interpretations. Finde we for all that any end of need of interpreters? Is
there any advancement or progresse towards tranquillity seen therein? Have we now
less need of Advocates and Judges than when this huge masse of Law was yet in her first
infancy? Cleane contrary: we obscure and bury understanding. We discover it no more but
at the mercy of so many Courts, Barres, or Plea-benches. Men misacknowledge the
natural infirmity of their mind. She does but quest and firret, and uncessantly goeth
turning, winding, building, and entangling herself in her own work, as do our silke-
wormes, and therein stifleth herself. Mus in pice: ’A mouse in pitch.’ He supposeth to
note a far-off I wot not what apparance of cleerenesse and imaginary truth; but whilst he
runneth unto it, so many lets and difficulties crosse his way, so many impeachments and
new questings start up, that they stray loose and besot him. Not much otherwise than it
fortuned to Aesops Dogs who far-off discovering some show of a dead body to flote
upon the Sea, and being unable to approach the same, undertook to drinke up all the
Water, that so they might drie up the passage, and were all stifeled. To which answereth
that which Crates said of Heraclitus his compositions, that they needed a Reader who
should be a cunning swimmer, lest the depth and weight of his learning should drowne
and swallow him up. It is nothing but a particular weakenesse that makes us contend with
that which others or we ourselves have found in this pursuite of knowledge. A more
sufficient man will not be pleased therewith. There is a place for a follower, indeed for
ourselves, and More ways to the Wood than one. There is no end in our inquisitions. Our
end is in the other World. It is a signe his wits grow short when he is pleased, or a signe of
wearinesse. No generous spirit stayes and relies upon himself: he ever pretendtfh and
goeth beyond his strength. He has some vagaries beyond his effects. If he advance not
himself, press, settle, shocke, turn, winde and front himself, he is but halfe alive; His
pursuits are termelesse and formelesse. His nourishment is admiration, questing, and
ambiguity: Which Apollo declared sufficiently, alwayes speaking ambiguously, obscurely,
and obliquely unto us - not feeding, but busying and ammusing us. It is an irregular,
uncertaine motion, perpetuall, patternelesse, and without end. His inventions enflame,
follow, and enter-produce one another.
Ainsi voit-on en un ruisseau coulant,
Sans fin l’une eau, apres l’autre roulant,
Et tout de rang, d’un eternal conduict,
L’une suit l’autre, et l’une l’autre fuit.
Par cette-cy, celle-la est Poussée,
Et cette-cy, par I’autre est devancée:
Tousjours l’leau va dans l’eau, et tousjours est ce
Mesme ruisseau et tousjours eau diverse.
As in a running river we behold
How one wave after the other still is rold,
And all along as it does endlesse rise,
Th’ one the other followes, the one from the other flyes,

By this Wave that is driv’n; and this again
By the other is set forward all amaine:
Water in Water still, one river still,
Yet diverse Waters still that river fill.
There’s more adoe to enterpret interpretations than to interpret things, and more bookes
upon bookes then upon any other subject. We do but enter-glose ourselves. All swarmeth
with commentaries; of Authors there is great penury. Is not the chiefest and most famous
knowledge of our ages to know how to understand the wise? Is it not the common and last
scope of our study? Our opinions are grafted one upon an other. The first serveth as a
stocke to the second, the second to the third. Thus we ascend from steppe to steppe.
Whence it followeth that the highest-mounted has often more honor than merit. For he
is got-up but one inch above the shoulders of the last save one. How often, and
perhaps foolishly, have I enlarged my Book to speak of himself? Foolishly, if it
were but for this reason: That I should have remembred that what I speak of others they
do the like of me. That those so frequent glances on their workes witnes their hart
shivereth with the love they bear them, and that the disdainfull churlishnesse wherewith
they beate them are but mignardizes and affectations of a motherly favor. Following
Aristotle, in whom, both esteeming and dis-esteeming himself arise often of an equall
aire of arrogancy. For mine excuse, That in this I ought to have more liberty than others,
forasmuch as of purpose I write both of my self and of my writings as of my other
actions, that my theame does turn into itself; I wot not whether every man will take it. I
have seen in Germany that Luther has left as many divisions and altercations concerning
the doubt of his opinions, indeed, and more, than himself moveth about the Holy Scriptures.
Our contestation is verball. I demaund what Nature, voluptuousness, circle, and
substitution is? The question is of words, and with words it is answered. A stone is a body:
but he that should insist and urge: And what is a body? - A substance. And what is a
substance? and so go-on, should at last bring the respondent to his Calepine or wits end.
One word is changed for another word, and often more unknown. I know better what
Homo is then I know what Animal is, either mortal or reasonable. To answere one doubt
they give me three: It is Hidræs head. Socrates demanded of Memnon what virtue was.
’There is,’ answered Memnon, ’the virtue of a Man, of a Woman, of a Magistrate, of a
private Man, of a Childe, of an old Man. What virtue meane you?’ ’Yea, marry. this is
very well,’ quoth Socrates; ’we were in search of one virtue, and you bringest me a
whole swarme.’ We propose one question, and we have a whole huddle of them made unto
us again. As no event or form does wholly resemble another, so does it not altogether
differ one from another. Oh, ingenious mixture of Nature! If our faces were not like, we
could not discerne a man from a beast; If they were not unlike, we could not distinguish
one man from another man. All things hold by some similitude; Every example limpeth.
And the relation which is drawne from experience is ever defective and imperfect.
Comparisons are, nevertheless, joined together by some end. So serve the Lawes, and so
are they sorted and fitted to all our sutes or affairs by some wiredrawen, forced, and
collateral interpretation. Since the morall Lawes, which respect the particular duty of

every man in himself, are so hard to be taught and observed as we see they are: It is no
wonder if those which governe so many particulars, are more hard. Consider the form of
this Law by which we are ruled: It is a lively testimony of humane imbecility, so much
contradiction and so many errours are therin contained. That which we think favor or
rigour in Law (wherein is so much of either, that I wot not well whether we shall so often
find indifferency in them), or crazed-infected parts and unjust members of the very body
and essence of Law. Certain poore country-men came even now to tell me in a great
haste, that but now in a forrest of mine they have left a man wounded to death, with a
hundred hurts about him, yet breathing, and who for God’s sake has begged a little water
and some helpe to raise himself at their hands; But that they durst not come near him,
and ran all away, for fear some officers belonging to the Law should meete and catch
them, and as they do with such as they find near unto a murthered body, so they should
be compelled to give an account of this mischance, to their utter undooing, having
neither friends nor mony to defend their innocency. What should I have said unto them? It
is most certain that this Office of humanity had brought them to much trouble. How
many innocent and guiltlesse men have we seen punished? I say without the Judge’s
fault? and how many more that were never discovered? This has hapned in my time.
Certain men are condemned to death for a murther committed; the sentence, if not
pronounced, at least concluded and determined. This done, the Judges are advertised by
the Officers of a subalternall Court, not far-off, that they have certain prisoners in hold
that have directly confessed the foresaid murther, and thereof bring most evident markes
and tokens. The question and consultation is now in the former Court, whether for all this
they might interrupt or should deferre the execution of the sentence pronounced against
the first. They consider the novelty of the example and consequence thereof, and how to
reconcile the judgement. They conclude that the condemnation has passed according unto
Law, and therefore the Judges are not subject to repentance. To be short, these miserable
Wretches are consecrated to the prescriptions of the Law. Philip, or some other, provided
for such an inconvenience in this manner: he had by an irrevocable sentence condemned
one to pay another a round summe of money for a fine. A while after, the truth being
discovered, it was found he had wrongfully condemned him. On one side was the right of
the cause, on the other the right of judiciary formes. He is in some sort to satisfie both
parties, suffering the sentence to stand in full power, and with his own purse
recompenced the interest of the condemned. But he was to deale with a reparable
accident; my poore slaves were hanged irreparably. How many condemnations have I
seen more criminall than the crime itself? All this put me in mind of those ancient
opinions: That He who will do right in grosse must needs do wrong by retaile; and
injustly in small things, that will come to do justice in great matters. That humane justice
is framed according to the modell of physicke, according to which, whatsoever is
profitable is also just and honest; And of that the Stoices hold that Nature herself, in
most of her workes, proceedeth against justice; And of that which the Cyreniaques hold,
that there is nothing just of itself: That customs and laws frame justice. And the
Theodorians, who in a wise man allow as just all manner of theft, sacriledge, and
paillardise, so he think it profitable for him. There is no remedy: I am in that case as

Alcibiades was, and if I can otherwise chuse, will never put my self unto a man that shall
determine of my head, or consent that my honor or life shall depend on the industry or
care of mine atturney more then mine innocency. I could willingly adventure my self and
stand to that Law that should as well recompence me for a good deed as punish me for a
mis-deede, and where I might have a just cause to hope, as reason to fear. Indemnitie is
no sufficient coyne for him who does better than not to trespasse. Our Law presents us but
one of her hands, and that is her left hand. Whosoever goes to Law, does in the end but
lose by it. In China, the policy, arts and government of which kingdome, having neither
knowledge or commerce with ours exceed our examples in diverse parts of excellency, and
whose Histories teach me how much more ample and diverse the World is than either we
or our forefathers could ever enter into. The Officers appointed by the Prince to visite the
state of his Provinces, as they punish such as abuse their charge, so with great liberality
they reward such as have uprightly and honestly behaved themselves in them, or have
done any thing more then ordinary, and besides the necessity of their duty; There all
present themselves, not only to warrant themselves, but also to get something. Not
simply to be paid, but liberally to be rewarded. No judge has yet, God be thanked, spoken
to me as a judge in any cause Whatsoever, either mine or another mans, criminal or civill.
No prison did ever receive me, no not so much as for recreation to walke in. The very
imagination of one maketh the sight of their outside seem irkesome and loathsome to me.
I am so besotted unto liberty that should any man forbid me the accesse unto any one
corner of the Indiæs I should in some sort live much discontented. And so long as I shall
find land or open aire elsewhere, I shall never lurke in any place where I must bide my
self. Oh God how hardly could I endure the miserable condition of so many men
confined and immured in some corners of this kingdome, barred from entring the chiefest
Cities, from accesse into Courts, from conversing with men, and interdicted the use of
common ways, only because they have offended our laws. If those under which I live
should but threaten my fingers end, I would presently go find out some others,
wherever it were. All my small wisdom, in these civill and tumultuous wars
wherein we now live, does wholly employ itself, that they may not interrupt my liberty
to go and come where ever I list. Lawes are now maintained in credit, not because they
are essentially just, but because they are laws. It is the mysticall foundation of their
authority - they have none other - which availes them much: they are often made by
fooles; more often by men who, in hatred of equality, have want of equity; But ever by
men who are vain and irresolute Authours. There is nothing so grossely and largely
offending, nor so ordinarily wronging as the Lawes. Whosoever obeyeth them because
they are just, obeyes them not justly the way as he ought. Our French laws do in some
sort, by their irregularity and deformity, lend a helping hand unto the disorder and
corruption that is seen in their dispensation and execution. Their behest is so confused,
and their command so inconstant, that it in some sort excuseth both the disobedience and
the vice of the interpretation, of the administration, and of the observation. Whatsoever
then the fruit is we may have of Experience, the same which we draw from forraine
examples will hardly stead our institution much; if we reape so small profit from that we
have of ourselves, which is most familiar unto us, and truely sufficient to instruct us of

what we want. I study my self more than any other subiect. It is my supernaturall
Metaphisik, it is my natural Philosophy.
Qua Deus hanc mundi temperet arte domum,
Qua venit exoriens, qua deficit unde coactis
Cornibus in plenum menstrua luna redit:
Unde salo superant venti, quid flamine captet
Eurus, et in nubes unde perennis æqua.
Sit ventura dies mundi quæ subruat arces. -- Propert. iii. El. iv. 26.
This Worlds great house by what arte God does guide;
From whence the monethly Moone does rising ride,
How wane, how with clos’d horns returns to pride,
How winds on seas bear sway, what the Easterne winde
Would have, how still in clouds we water find;
If this worlds Towers to rase a day be signde.
Quærite, quos agitat mundi labor:
All this do you enquire
Whom this worlds travails tyre.
In this universality I suffer my self ignorantly and negligently to be managed by the
general law of the world. I shall sufficiently know it when I shall feel it. My learning
cannot make her change her course; she will not diversifie herself for me; it were folly to
hope it: And greater folly for a man to trouble him self about it; since it is necessarily
semblable, publicke, and common. The governours capacity and goodnesse should
throughly discharge us of the governments care. Philosophicall inquisitions and
contemplations serve but as a nourishment unto our curiosity. With great reason do
philosophers addresse us unto natures rules; but they have nought to do with so sublime a
knowledge; They falsifie them, and present her to us with a painted face, too-high in
colour and overmuch sophisticated; whence arise so many different pourtraits of so
uniform a subject. As she has given us feete to go withall, so has she endowed us with
wisdom to direct our life. A wisdom not so ingenious, sturdy, and pompous as that of
their invention, but yet easy, quiet and salutairie. And that in him who has the hap to
know how to employ it orderly and sincerely, effecteth very well what the other says, that
is to say, naturally. For a man to commit himself most simply unto nature is to do it
most wisely. Oh how soft, how gentle, and how sound a pillow is ignorance and
incuriosity to rest a well composed head upon. I had rather understand my self well in my
self then in Cicero. Out of the experience I have of my self I find sufficient ground to
make my self wise were I but a good proficient scholler. Whosoever shall commit to
memory the excess or inconvenience of his rage or anger past, and how far that fit

transported him, may see the deformity of that passion better then in Arisiotle, and
conceive a more just hatred against it. Whosoever calleth to mind the dangers he has
escaped, those which have threatned him, and the light occasions that have remooved him
from one to another state, does thereby the better prepare himself to future alterations and
knowledge of his condition. Cæsar’s life has no more examples for us then our own;
Both imperiall and popular, it is ever a life that all humane accidents regard. Let us but
give care unto it, we recorde all that to us that we principally stand in neede of. He that
shall call to mind how often and how severall times he has been deceived and mis-
accompted his own judgement, is he not a simple gull if he do not for ever afterward
distrust the same? When by others reason I find my self convicted of a false opinion, I
learne not so much what new thing he has told me; and this particular ignorance, which
were but a small purchase, as in general I learne my own imbecility and weakenesse,
and the treason of my understanding, whence I draw the reformation of all the masse. The
like I do in all my other errours, by which rule I apprehend and feel great profit for and
unto my life. I regarde not the species or individuum as a stone whereon I have stumbled;
I learne every where to fear my going, and endeavor to order the same. To learne that
another has either spoken a foolish jest or committed a sottish act is a thing of nothing. A
man must learne that he is but a foole: A much more ample and important instruction. The
false steps my memory has so often put upon me at what time she stood most upon her
self, have not idlely been lost: she may sweare and warrant me long enough, I shake
mine ears at her: the first opposition made in witness of her makes me suspect. And I
durst not trust her in a matter of consequence, nor warrant her touching others affairs.
And were it not that what I do for want of memory, others more often do the same for
lacke of faith, I would even in a matter of fact rather take the truth from anothers mouth
then from my own. Would every man pry into the effects and circumstances of the
passions that sway him as I have done of that whereunto I was allotted, he should see
them coming, and would somewhat hinder their course and abate their impetuosity;
They do not alwayes surprise and take hold of us at the first brunt there are certain
forethreatnings and degrees as forerunners.
Fluctus uti primo coepit cum albescere ponto,
Paulatim sese tollit mare, et altius undas
Erigit, inde imo consurgit ad æthera fundo.
As when at sea, floods first in whiteness rise,
Sea surgeth softly, and then higher plies
In waves, then from the ground mounts up to skies.
Judgement holds in me a presidential seate, at least he carefully endevours to hold it;
He suffers my appetits to keep their course, both hatred and love, indeed that I bear unto
my self, without feeling alteration or corruption. If he can not reforme other parts
according to himself, at least he will not be deformed by them; he keepes his court apart.
That warning-lesson given to all men, to know themselves, must necessarily be of

important effect, since that God of wisdom, knowledge, and light, caused the same to be
fixed on the fron tispiece of his temple, as containing whatsoever he was to counsell us.
Plato says also that wisdom is nothing but the execution of that ordinance; And
Socrates does distinctly verifle the same in Zenophon. Difficulties and obscurity are not
perceived in every science, but by such as have entrance into them: For some degree of
intelligence is required to be able to marke that one is ignorant, and we must knocke at a
gate to know whether it be shutte. Whence ensueth this Platonicall subtilty, that neyther
those which know have no further to enquire, forasmuch as they know already; nor they
that know not, because to enquire it is necessary they know what they enquire after. Even
so in this for a man to know himself, that every man is seen so resolute and satisfied and
thinks himself sufficiently instructed or skilfull does plainely signifie that no man
understands any thing, as Socrates teacheth Euthydemus. My self, who professe nothing
else, find therein so bottomlesse a depth and infinite variety, that my apprentisage has
no other fruit than to make me perceive how much more there remaineth form to learne.
To my own weaknesse so often acknowledged I owe this inclination which I bear unto
modesty, to the obedience of beliefes prescribed unto me, to a constant coldnesse and
moderation of opinions, and hatred of this importunate and quarrellous arrogancy, wholly
beleeving, and trusting itself, a capital enemy to discipline and verity. Doe but hear
them sway and talk. The first fopperies they propose are in the stile, that Religions and
Lawes are composeth in. Nihil est turpius quam cognitioni et præceptioni, assertionem
approbationemque præcurrere: (Cic. Acad. Qu. i. f.) ’Nothing is more absurd than that
avouching and allowance should run before knowledge and præcept.’Aristarchus said
that in ancient times there were scarse seven wise men found in the world, and in his time
hardly seven ignorant. Have not we more reason to say it in our dayes than he had?
Affirmation and self-conceit are manifest signes of foolishnesse. Some one, who a
hundred times a day has had the canvase and been made a stark coxcombe, shall
notwithstanding be seen to stand upon his Ergoes, and as presumptuously-resolute as
before. You would say he has since some now mind and vigor of understanding infused
into him. And that it betides him as to that ancient child of the Earth, who by his falling
to the ground and touching his Mother still gathered new strength and fresh courage.
------ cui cum tetigere parentem,
Jam defecta vigent renovato robore membra. -- Antæus.
Whose failing limbs with strength renew’d regrow,
When they once touch his mother Earth below.
Does not this indocile, blocke-headed asse think to reassume a new spirit by
undertaking a new disputation? It is by my experience I accuse humane ignorance, which
(in mine opinion) is the surest part of the Worlds schoole. Those that will not conclude it
in themselves by so vain an example as mine or theirs, let them acknowledge it by
Socrates, the Maister of Maisters. For the Philosopher Antisthenes was wont to say to his
Disciples, ’Come on, my Maisters, let you and me go to hear Socrates; There shall I be a

fellow Disciple with you.’ And upholding this Doctrine of the Stoices Sect, that only
virtue sufficed to make a life absolutely-happy, and having no need of any thing but of
Socrates his force and resolution, he added moreover: This long attention I employ in
considering my self enableth me also to judge indifferently of others; And there are few
things whereof I speak more happily and excusably. It often fortuneth me to see and
distinguish more exactly the conditions of my friends than themselves do. I have astonied
some by the pertinency of my own description, and have warned him of himself.
Because I have from mine infancy enured my self to view my own life in others lives;
I have thereby acquired a studious complexion therein. And when I think on it, I suffer
few things to escape about me that may in any sort fit the same, whether countenances,
humor, or discourses. I studiously consider all I am to eschew and all I ought to follow.
So by my friends productions I discover their inward inclinations. Not to marshall or
range this infinit variety of so diverse and so distracted actions to certain Genders or
Chapters, and distinctly to distribute my parcels and divisions into formes and known
regions.
Sed neque quam multæ species, et nomina quæ sint,
Est numerus. -- Virg. Georg. i. 103.
But not how many kinds, nor what their names:
There is a number of them (and their frames).
The wiser sort speak and declare their fantasies more specially and distinctly: But I
who have no further insight then I get from common use, without rule or methode
generally present my own but gropingly. As in this, I pronounce my sentence by
articles, loose and disjoynted; it is a thing cannot be spoken at once and at full. Relation
and conformity are not easily found in such base and common minds as ours. Wisedome
is a solid and compleate frame, every severall piece whereof keepeth his due place and
beareth his marke. Sola sapientia in se tota conversa est: ’Only wisdom is wholy turned
into itself.’ I leave it to Artists, and I wot not whether in a matter so confused, so severall
and so casual, they shall come to an end, to range into sides this infinit diversity of
visages; and settle our inconstancy and place it in order. I do not only find it difficult to
combine our actions one unto another; but take every one apart, it is hard by any principal
quality to design the same properly, so double, so ambiguous and party-coloured, are
they to diverse lusters. Which in Perseus the Macedonian King was noted for a rare matter,
that his spirit fastning itself to no kind of condition; went wandring through every kind
of life, and representing so newfangled and gadding maners, that he was neyther known
of himself nor of others what kind of man he was, me thinkes may well- nigh agree and
sute with all the world. And above all, I have seen some other of his coate or humor, to
whom (as I suppose) this conclusion might also more properly be applied. No state of
mediocrity being ever transported from one extreme to another, by indivinable occasions,
no manner of course without crosse and strange contrarieties; no faculty simple, so that the
likeliest a man may one day conclude of him, shall be that he affected and laboured to

make himself known by being not to be known. A man had neede of long-tough ears
to hear himself freely judged. And because there be few that can endure to hear it
without tingling, those which adventure to undertake it with us, show a singular effect of
true friendship. For that is a truely perfect love which, to profit and do good, feareth not
to hurt or offend. I deem it absurd to censure him in whom bad qualities exceed good
conditions. Plato requireth three parts in him that will examine anothers mind: Learning,
goodwill, and boldness. I was once demanded what I would have thought my self fit-
for, had any been disposed to make use of me, when my years would have fitted
service:
Dum melior vires sanguis dabat, æmula nec dum
Temporibus geminis canebat sparsa senectus. -- Virg. Æn. v. 415.
While better blood gave strength, nor envious old years
Ore-laid with wrinckled temples grew to hoary haires.
I answered, for nothing. And I willingly excuse my self that I can do nothing which may
enthrall me to others. But had my fortune made me a servant, I would have told my
maister all truths ; and, had he so willd it, controled his maners: Not in grosse, by
scholasticall lessons, which I cannot do: besides, I see no true reformation to ensue in
such as know them but fair and softly, and with every opportunity observing them, and
simply and naturally judging them distinctly by the eye. Making him to perceive how and
in what degree he is in the common opinion; opposing himself against his flatterers and
sycophants. There is none of us but would be worse then Kings if, as they are, we were
continually corrupted with that rascally kind of people. But what? if Alexander, that
mighty King and great Philosopher, could not beware of them? I should have had
sufficient fidelity, judgement and liberty for that. It would be a namelesse office,
otherwise it should lose both effect and grace; And is a part which cannot indifferently
belong to all. For truth itself has not the priviledge to be employed at all times and in
every kind; Be her use never so noble, it has his circumscriptions and limits. It often
commeth to pass, the world standing as it does, that truth is whispered into Princes ears,
not only without fruit, but hurtfully and therewithall unjustly. And no man shall make me
believe but that an hallowed admonition may be viciously applied and abusively
employed; and that the interest of the substance should not sometimes yield to the interest
of the form. For such a purpose and mystery I would have an unrepining man and one
contented with his own fortune,
Quod sit, esse velit, nihilque malit: == Mart. x. Epig. xlvii.12.
Willing to be as him you see,
Or rather nothing else to be:

and borne of meane degree; Forasmuch as on the one side he should not have cause to
fear, lively and neerely to touch his maisters heart, thereby not to lose the cause of his
preferment; And on the other side, being of a low condition, he should have more easy
communication with all sorts of people. Which I would have in one man alone; for, to
empart the priviledge of such liberty and familiarity unto many would beget an hurtful
irreverence. Yea, and of that man I would above all things require trusty and assured
silence. A King is not to be credited when for his glory he boasteth of his constancy in
attending his enemies encounter, if for his good amendment and profit he cannot endure
the liberty of his friends words, which have no other working power then to pinch his
learning; the rest of their effect remaining in his own hands. Now, there is not any
condition of men that has more neede of true, sincerely-free and open hearted
advertisements then Princes. They undergoe a public life, and must applaude the opinion
of so many spectators, that if they be once enured to have that concealed from them which
diverteth them from their course, they at unawares and insensibly find themselves
deepely engaged in the hatred and detestation of their subjects, many times for occasions,
which had they been forewarned, and in time gently reformed, they might no doubt have
eschewed to no interest or prejudice of their private delights. Favorits do commonly
respect themselves more then their masters. And surely it toucheth their free-hold,
forasmuch as in good truth the greatest part of true friendships-offices are towards their
sovereign in a crabbed and dangerous Essay. So that there is not only required much
affection and liberty, but also an undanted courage. To conclude, all this galiemafry which
I huddle-up here is but a register of my lives-Essayes, which in regard of the internall
health are sufficiently exemplary to take the instruction against the hair. But concerning
bodily health, no man is able to bring more profitable experience then my self, who
present the same pure, sincere, and in no sort corrupted or altred, either by art or self-
will’d opinion. Experience in her own precinct may justly be compared to Physicke, unto
which reason gives place. Tiberius was wont to say that whosoever had lived twenty
years should be able to answer himself of all such things as were either wholesome or
hurtful for him, and know how to live and order his body without Phisicke. Which he
perhaps had learned of Socrates, who industriously advising his disciples (as a study
of chief consequence) to study their health, told them, moreover, that it was very hard if a
man of understanding, heedfully observing his exercises, his eating and drinking, should
not better than any Phisition discerne and distinguish such things as were either good or
bad or indifferent for him. Yet does Physicke make open profession alwayes to have
experience for the touchstone of her operation. And Plato had reason to say that to be a
good Pbysitian it were requisite that he who should undertake that profession had past
through all such diseases as he will adventure to cure, and known or felt all the
accidents and circumstances he is to judge of. It is reason themselves should first have the
pox if they will know how to cure them in others. I should surely trust such a one better
then any else. Others but guide us, as one who, sitting in his chaire paints seas, rockes,
shelves and havens upon a board, and makes the modell of a tall ship to saile in all safety;
But put him to it in earnest, he knowes not what to do nor where to begin. They make
even such a description of our infirmities as does a town-crier, who crieth a lost horse, or

dog, and describeth his hair, his stature, his ears, with other markes and tokens; but
bring either unto him, he knowes him not. Oh God, that physicke would one day affoord
me some good and perceptible helpe, how earnestly would I exclaime:
Tandem efficaci do manus scientiæ,
I yield, I yield at length,
To knowledge of chief strength.
The Arts that promise to keep our body and mind in good health promise much unto
us, but therewith there is none performeth less what they promise. And in our dayes such
as make profession of these Arts amongst us do less then all others show their effects.
The most may be said of them is that they sell medicinable drugs; but that they are
Physitians, no man can truly say it. I have lived long enough to yield an account of the
usage that has brought me to this day. If any be disposed to taste of it, as his taster I
have given him an assay. See here some articles, digested as memory shall store me with
them. I have no fashion, but has varied according to accidents; I only register those I
have most been acquainted with, and hitherto possesse me most. My form of life is ever
likewise, both in sicknesse and in health: one same bed, the same hours, the same meate, the
same drinke does serve me. I adde nothing to them but the moderation of more or less,
according to my strength or appetite. My health is to keep my accustomed state free from
care and trouble. I see that sicknesse does on the one side in some sort divert me from it,
and if I believe Physitians, they on the other side will turn me from it; So that both by
fortune and by art I am cleane out of my right bias. I believe nothing more certainly then
this, that I cannot be offended by the use of things which I have so long accustomed. It is
in the hands of custom to give our life what form it pleaseth, in that it can do all in all. It
is drinke of Circes diversifieth our nature as she thinkes good. How many nations near
bordering upon us imagine the fear of the sereine or night-calme to be but a jest, which
so apparently does blast and hurt us? and whereof our Mariners, our watermen and our
countrey men make but a laughing-stocke? You make a Germane sicke if you lay him
upon a matteras, as you distemper an Italian upon a fetherbed, and a Frenchman to lay him
in a bed without curtaines, or lodge him in a chamber without a fire. A Spaniard can not
well brooke to feede after our fashion, nor we endure to drinke as the Swizzers. A
Germane pleased me well at Augusta to rail against the commodity of our chimnies,
using the same reasons or arguments that we ordinarily employ in condemning their
stoves. For, to say truth, the same close-smoothered heate and the smell of that oft-heated
matter whereof they are composed, fumeth in the heads of such as are not accustomed
unto them; not so with me. But on the other side, that heate being equally dispersed,
constant and universall, without flame or blazing, without smoake, and without that wind
which the tonnels of our chimnies bring us, may many ways be compared unto ours.
Why do we not imitate the Romanes architecture? It is reported that in ancient times they
made no fire in their houses, but without and at the foote of them; Whence by tonnels,
which were convaide through their thickest wals, and contrived near and about all such

places as they would have warmed; so that the heat was convaied into every part of the
house. Which I have seen manifestly described in some place of Seneca, though I can not
well remember where. This Germane, hearing me commend the beauties and commodities
of this City (which truely deserveth great commendation), beganne to pity me, because I
was shortly to go from it. And the first inconvenience he urged me withall was the
heaviness in the head which Chimnies in other places would cause me. He had heard
some other body complain of it, and therefore alleadged the same against me, being wont
by custom to perceive it in such as came to him. All heat coming from fire does
weaken and dull me; Yet said Evenus, that fire was the best sauce of life. I rather allow
and embrace any other manner or way to escape cold. We fear our Wines when they are
low; whereas in Portugall the fum e of it is counted delicious, and is the drinke of Princes.
To conclude, each severall Nation has diverse customs, fashions and usages, which to
some others are not only onknowne and strange, but savage, barbarous, and wondrous.
What shall we do unto that people that admit no witness except printed; that will not
believe men if not printed in Bookes, nor credit truth unless it be of competent age? We
dignifie our fopperies when we put them to the press. It is another manner of weight for
him to say, I have seen it, then if you say I have heard it reported. But I, who misbelieve
no more the mouth than the hand of men, and know that men write as indiscreetly as they
speak unadvisedly, and esteeme of this present age as of another past, alleadge as
willingly a friend of mine as Aulus Gellius or Macrobius, and what my self have seen as
that they have written. And as they accompt virtue to be nothing greater by being longer,
so deem I truth to be nothing wiser by being more aged. I often say it is meere folly that
makes us run after strange and scholasticall examples. The fertility of them is now
equall unto that of Homer and Platoes times. But is it not that we rather seek the Honour
of allegations than the truth of discourses? As if it were more to borrow our proofes from
out the shop of Vascosan or Plantin, then from that we dayly see in our village. Or verily
that we have not the wit to blanch, sift out, or make that to prevaile which passeth before
us, and forcibly judge of it to draw the same into example. For if we say that authority
failes us to adde credit unto our testimony, we speak from the purpose. Forasmuch as in
my conceit, could we but find out their true light, Natures greatest miracles and the most
wonderful examples, namely, upon the subject of humane actions, may be drawne and
formed from most ordinary, most common and most known things. Now concerning my
subject, omiting the examples I know by bookes, And that which Aristotle speaks of
Andron of Argos, that he would travell all over the scorching sands of Lybia without
drinking: A Gentleman, who has worthily acquitted himself of many honorable
charges, reported where I was, that in the parching heate of Summer he had travelled
from Madrid to Lisbone without ever drinking. His age respected, he is in very good and
healthy plight, and has nothing extraordinary in the course or custom of his life saving
(as himself has told me) that he can very well continue two or three moneths, indeed a
whole yeere, without any manner of beverage. He sometimes finds himself thirsty, but
lets it pass, and holds that it is an appetit which will easily and of itself languish away;
and if he drinke at any time it is more for a caprice or humor than for any need or
pleasure. See here one of another key. It is not long since that I found, one of the wisest

men of France (among those of so meane fortune) studying hard in the corner of a great
Hall, which for that purpose was hung about with tapistry, and round about him a
disordered rable of his servants, groomes and lackeis, pratling, playing and hoyting; who
told me (as Seneca in a manner says of himself) that he learn’d and profited much by that
burly-burly or tintimare, as if beaten with that confused noyse he did so much the better
recall and close himself into himself for serious contemplation; and that the said
tempestuous rumours did strike and repercusse his thoughts inward. Whilst he was a
scholler in Padua his study was ever placed so near the jangling of bels, the ratling of
coaches, and rumbling tumults of the market place, that for the service of his study he was
faine not only to frame and enure himself to contemne, but to make good use of that
turbulent noise. Socrates answered Alcibiades, who wondered how he could endure the
continuall tittle-tattle and incessant scoulding of his Wife, even as those who are
accustomed to hear the ordinary creaking of the squeaking wheeles of wells. My self am
cleane contrary, for I have a tender braine, and easy to take snuffe in the nose or to be
transported. If my mind be busie alone, the least stirring, indeed, the buzzing of a flie does
trouble and distemper the same. Seneca in his youth, having earnestly undertaken to
follow the example of Sextius, to feed on nothing that were taken dead, could with
pleasure (as himself averreth) live so a whole yeere. And left it only because he would
not be suspected to borrow this rule from some new religions that instituted the same. He
therewithall followed some precepts of Attalus, not to lie upon any kind of carpets or
bedding that would yield under one; and until he grew very aged he never used but such
as were very hard and unyielding to the body. What the custom of his dayes makes him
accompt rudenesse, ours makes us esteeme wantonnesse. Behold the difference betweene
my varlets life and mine. The Indians have nothing further from my form and strength.
Well I wot that I have heretofore taken boyes from begging, and that went roaguing up
and down to serve me, hoping to do some good upon them, who have within a little while
after left me, my fare and my livery, only that they might without controule or checke
follow their former idle loytring life. One of which I found not long since gathering of
muskles in a common sincke for his dinner, whom (do what I could) I was never able,
neyther with entreaty to reclaime, nor by threatning to withdraw from the sweetness he
found in want, and delight he felt in roaguing lazinesse. Even vagabondine roagues, as
well as rich men, have their magnificences and voluptuousness, and (as some say) their
dignities, preheminences and politike orders. They are effects of custom and use; and
what is bred in the bone will never out of the flesh. Both which have power to enure and
fashion us, not only to what form they please (therefore, say the wise, ought we to be
addressed to the best, and it will immediately seem easy unto us), but also to change and
variation. Which is the noblest and most profitable of their apprentisages? The best of my
corporall complexions is that I am flexible and little opiniative. I have certain
inclinations, more proper and ordinary, and more pleasing than others. But with small
adoe and without compulsion, I can easily leave them and embrace the contrary. A yong
man should trouble his rules to stir-up his vigor, and take heed he suffer not the same to
grow faint, sluggish, or teasty; For there is no course of life so weake and sottish as that
which is mannaged by Order, Methode, and Discipline.

Ad primum lapidem vectari cum placet, hora
Sumitur ex libro, si prurit frictus ocelli
Angulus, inspecta genesi collyria quanerit. -- Juven. Sat. vi. 477.
List he to ride in coach but to Mile-end,
By th’Almanacke be does the hour attend:
If his eye-corner itch, the remedy,
He fets from calculation of nativity.
If he believe me be shall often give himself unto all manner of excess; otherwise the
least disorder wil utterly overthrow him, and so make him unfit and unwelcome in all
conversations. The most contrary quality in an honest man is nice-delicatenesse, and to
be tied to one certain particular fashion. It is particular, if it be not supple and pliable. It
is a kind of reproch, through impuissance, not to do or not to dare what one seeth his
other companions do or dare. Let such men keep their kitchin. It is undecent in all other
men, but vitious and intolerable in one professing Armes, who (as Philopoemen said)
should fashion himself to all manner of inequality and diversity of life. I have (as much
as might be) been inured to liberty and fashioned to indifferency, yet in growing aged I
have through carelesnesse relied more upon certain formes (my age is now exempted
from institution, and has not any thing else to looke unto but to maintaine itself) which
custom has already, without thinking on it, certain things so well imprinted her
character in me, that I deem it a kind of excess to leave them. And without long practise
I can neither sleepe by day, nor eate betweene meales, nor break my fast, nor go to bed
without some entermission (as of three hours after supper), nor get children but before I
fall asleepe, and that never standing, nor bear my own sweate, nor quench my thirst
either with clear water or wine alone, nor continue long bare-headed, nor have mine hair
cut after dinner. And I could as hardly spare my gloves as my shirt, or forbeare washing of
my hands both in the mornng and rising from the table, or lie in a bed without a testerne
and curtaines about it, as of most necessary things. I could dine without a tablecloth, but
hardly without a cleane napkin, as Germans commonly do. I foul and sully them more
then either they or the Italians, and I seldom use either spoone or forke. I am sory we
follow not a custom which, according to the example of Kings, I have seen begunne by
some, that upon every course or change of dish, as we have shift of cleane trenchers, so
we might have change of cleane napkins. We read that that laborious souldier Marius,
growing olde, grew more nicely delicate in his drinking, and would taste no drincke
except in a peculiar cuppe of his. As for me, I observe a kind of like methode in glasses,
and of one certain form, and drinke not willingly in a common-glasse, no more than of
one ordinary hand. I mislike all manner of metall in regard of a bright transparent matter:
let mine eyes also have taste of what I drinke according to their capacity. I am beholding
to custom for many such nicenesses and singularities. Nature has also on the other side
bestowed this upon me, that I can not well brooke two full meales in one day without
surcharging my [stomacke]; nor the meere abstinence of one without filling my self with

winde, drying my mouth, and dulling my appetite; And I do find great offence by a long
sereine or night-calme. For some yeeres since, in the out-roades or night-services that
happen in times of wars, which many times continue all night, five or sixe hours after
my stomacke beginnes to qualme, my head feeleth a violent aking, so that I can hardly
hold-out till morning without vomiting. When others go to breakefast, I go to sleepe,
and within a while after I shall be as fresh and jolly as before. I ever thought that the
serein never fell but in the shutting in of night, but having in these latter yeeres long time
frequented very familiarly the conversation with a Gentleman possessed with this opinion,
that it is more sharpe and dangerous about the declination of the Sunne, an hour or two
before it set, which he carefully eschews and despiseth that which falls at night, he has
gone about to persuade and imprint into me, not only his discourse, but also his conceit.
What if the very doubt and inquisition woundeth our imagination and chanceth us? Such
as altogether yielde to these bendings draw the whole ruine upon themselves. And I
bewaile diverse Gentlemen, who being young and in perfect health, have by the ignorant
foolishnes of their Physitians brought themselves into consumptions and other lingering
diseases, and, as it were, in Physicks fetters. Were it not much better to be troubled with a
rheume, than for ever through discustome, in an action of so great use and consequence,
lose the commerce and conversation of common life? Oh, yrkesome learning! Oh, Science
full of molestation, that wasteth us the sweetest hours of the day! Let us extend our
possession unto the utmost means. A man shall at last, in opinionating himself, harden
and enure himself for it, and so correct his complexion, as did Cæsars the falling
sicknesse, with contemning and corrupting the same. A man should apply himself to the
best rules, but not subject himself unto them: except to such (if any there be) that duty
and thraldome unto them be profitable. Both Kings and Philosophers obey nature, and go
to the stoole, and so do Ladies. Publike lives are due unto ceremony; mine, which is
obscure and private, enjoyeth all natural dispensations. To be a Souldier and a Gascoyne
are qualities somewhat subject to indiscretion. And I am both. Therefore will I say this
much of this action, that it is requisite we should remit the same unto certain prescribed
night-hours, and by custom (as I have done) force and subject ourselves unto it; But not
(as I have done), growing in yeeres, strictly tie himself to the care of a particular
convenient place, and of a commodious Ajax or easy close-stoole for that purpose, and
make it troublesome with long sitting and nice observation. Nevertheless, in homeliest
matters and fowlest offices, is it not in some sort excusable to require more care and
cleanlinesse? Natura homo mundum et elegans animi est: (SEN. Epist. xcii.) ’By nature
man is a cleanely and neate creature.’ Of all natural actions, there is none wherein I am
more loath to be troubled or interrupted when I am at it. I have seen diverse great men and
soldiers much troubled and vexed with their bellies untune and disorder, when at
untimely hours it calleth upon them; whilst mine and my self never misse to call one
upon another at our appointment, which is as soone as I get out of my bed, except some
urgent business or violent sicknesse trouble me. Therefore, as I said, I judge no place
where sicke men may better seate themselves in security then quietly and wisht to hold
themselves in that course of life wherein they have been brought up and habituated. Any
change or variation soever astonishes and distempereth. Will any believe that Chestnuttes

can hurt a Perigordin or a Luquois, or that milke or whit-meates are hurtful unto a
mountaine dwelling people? whom if one seek to divert from their natural diet, he shall
not only prescribe them a new but a contrary form of life: A change which healthy man
can hardly endure? Appoint a Bretton of threescore yeeres of age to drinke water; put a
sea-man or Mariner into a Stove; forbid a lackey of Baske to walke: you bring them out of
their element, you deprive them of all motion, and in the end of aire, of light, and life.
------ an vivere tanti est?
Doe we reckon it so dear,
Only living to be here?
Cogimur a suctis animum suspendere rebus
Atque ut vivamus, vivere desinimus: -- Cor. Gal. El. i. 155.
From things erst us’d we must suspend our mind,
We leave to live that we may live by kind.
Hos superesse reor quibus et spirabilis ær,
Et lux quia regimur, redditur ipsa gravis.
Doe I think they live longer whom does grieve
Both aire they breathe and light whereby they live.
If they do no other good, at least they do this, that betimes they prepare their patients
unto death, by little undermining and cutting-off the use of life. Both in health and in
sicknesse I have willingly seconded and given my self over to those appetites that
pressed me. I allow great authority to my desires and propensions. I love not to cure one
evil by another mischief. I hate those remedies that importune more than sicknesse. To
be subject to the cholike, and to be tied to abstaine from the pleasure I have in eating of
oysters, are two mischiefes for one. The disease pincheth us the one side, the rule on the
other. Since we are ever in danger to misdoe, let us rather hazard ourselves to follow
pleasure. Most men do contrary and think nothing profitable that is not painefull;
Facility is by them suspected. Mine appetite has in diverse things very happily
accommodated and ranged itself to the health of my stomake. Being yong, acrimony and
tartnesse in sawces did greatly delight me, but my stomacke being since glutted therewith,
my taste has likewise seconded the same. Wine hurts the sicke; it is the first thing that
with an invincible distaste brings my mouth out of taste. Whatsoever I receive unwillingly
or distastefully hurts me, whereas nothing does it whereon I feed with hunger and rellish. I
never received harme by any action that was very pleasing unto me. And yet I have made
all medicinall conclusions largely to yield to my pleasures. And when I was yong -

Quem circumcursans huc atque huc sæpe Cupido
Fulgebat crocina splendidus in tunica. -- Catul. El. iv. 131.
About whom Cupid running here and there,
Shinde in the saffron coate which he did weare.
I have as licentiously and inconsiderately as any other furthred al such desires as
possessed me;
Et milita vi non sine gloria. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. xxvi. 2.
A Souldier of loves hoast,
I was not without boast.
More notwithstanding in continuation and holding out, then by snatches or by stealth.
Sex me vix mentini sustinuisse vices.
I scarce remember past
Six courses I could last.
It is surely a wonder accompanied with unhappinesse, to confesse how young and weake I
was brought under its subjection. Nay, shall I not blush to tell it? It was long before the
age of choise or yeeres of discretion; I was so young, as I remember nothing before. And
fitly may my fortune be compared to that of Quartilla, who remembred not her
maydenhead.
Inde tragus celeresque pili, mirandaque matri
Barba meæ.
Thence goatishnesse, haires over-soone, a beard
To make my mother wonder and afear’d.
Physitians commonly enfold and join their rules unto profit, according to the violence
of sharpe desires or earnest longings, that incidently follow the sicke; No longing desire
can be imagined so strange and vicious, but nature will apply herself unto it. And then
how easy is it to content ones fantasie? In mine opinion, this part importeth all in all; at
least more and beyond all other. The most grievous and ordinary evils are those which
fancy chargeth us withall. That Spanish saying does every way please me: Deffienda me
Dios de my: ’God defend me from my self.’ Being sicke, I am sory I have not some desire
may give me the contentment to satiate and cloy the same; Scarsly would a medicine
divert me from it. So do I when I am in health: I hardly see any thing left to be hoped or

wished-for. It is pity a man should be so weakned and enlanguished that he has nothing
left him but wishing. The art of Physicke is not so resolute, that whatsoever we do, we
shall be void of all authority to do it Shee cliangeth and she varieth according to climate;
according to the Moones; according to Fernelius, and according to Scala. If your
Physitian think it not good that you sleepe, that you drinke wine, or eate such and such
meates, Care not you for that, I will find you another that shall not be of his opinion. The
diversity of physicall arguments and medicinall opinions embraceth all manner of formes.
I saw a miserable sicke man, for the infinite desire he had to recover, ready to burst, indeed
and to die with thirst; whom not long since another Physitian mocked, utterly
condemning the others counsell as hurtful for him. Had not be bestowed his labor well?
A man of that coate is lately dead of the stone, who during the time of his sicknesse used
extreme abstinence to withstand his evil; his fellowes affirme that, contrary, his long
fasting had withered and dried him up, and so concocted the gravell in his kidnies. I have
found that in my hurts and other sicknesses, earnest talking distempers and hurts me as
much as any disorder I commit. My voice costs me dear, and wearieth me; for I have it
lowd, shrill and forced, So that, when I have had occasion to entertaine the ears of great
men about weighty affairs, I have often troubled them with care how to moderate my
voice. This story deserveth to be remembred and to divert me. A certain man in one of
the Greeke schooles spake very lowde, as I do; the maister of the ceremonies sent him
word he should speak lower: let him (quoth he) send me the tune or key in which he
would have me speak. The other replied, that he should take his tune from his ears to
whom he spake. It was well said, so he understood himself: Speake according as you
have to do with your auditory. For if one say, let it suffice that he heareth you, or governe
yourselfe by him; I do not think he had reason to say so. The tune or motion of the voice
has some expression or signification of my meaning. It is in me to direct the same, that so
I may the better represent my self. There is a voice to instruct, one to flatter, and another
to chide. I will not only have my voice come to him, but perhaps to wound and
pierce him. When I brawle and rate my lackey with a sharpe and piercing tune, were it fit
he should come to me and say, ’Master, speak softly, I understand and hear you very
well? Est quædam vox ad auditum accommodate non magnitudine sed proprietate: ’There
is a kind of voice well applied to the hearing, not by the greatness of it, but by the
proprietie.’ The word is halfe his that speaks and halfe his that harkeneth unto it. the
hearer ought to prepare himself to the motion or bound it taketh. As betweene those that
play at tennis, he who keepes the hazard does prepare, stand stir and march, according as
he perceives him who stands at the house, to looke, stand, remoove and strike the ball, and
according to the stroake. Experience has also taught me this, that we lose ourselves with
impatience. Evils have their life, their limits, their diseases and their health. The
constitution of diseases is framed by the patterne of the constitution of living creatures.
They have their fortune limited even at their birth, and their dayes allotted them. He that
shall imperiously go about, or by compulsion (contrary to their courses) to abridge them,
does lengthen and multiply them; and in stead of appeasing, does harsell and wring them. I
am of Crantors opinion, that a man must neither obstinately nor frantikely oppose
himself against evils; nor through demissenesse of courage faintingly yield unto them,

but according to their condition and ours naturally incline to them. A man must give
sickenesses their passage. And I find that they stay least with me, because I allow them
their swinge, and let them do what they list. And contrary to common received rules, I
have without ayde or art ridde my self of some that are deemed the most obstinately
lingring and unremoovably-obstinate. Let nature work; Let her have her will; She
knows what she has to do, and understands herself better then we do. But such a one
died of it, wil you say; so shal you doubtlesse; if not of that, yet of some other disease.
And how many have we seen die when they have had a whole Colledge of Pbysitians
round about their bed, and looking in their excrements? Example is a bright looking-
glasse, universall and for all shapes to looke into. If it be a lushious or taste-pleasing
portion, take it hardly; it is ever so much present ease. So it be delicious and sweetly
tasting, I will never stand much upon the name or colour of it. Pleasure is one of the
chiefest kinds of profit. I have suffered rheumes, gowty defluxions, relaxions, pantings of
the heart, megreimes and other such-like accidents, to grow old in me, and die their
natural death; all which have left me when I halfe enured and framed my self to foster
them. They are better conjured by curtesie then by bragging or threats. We must gently
obey and endure the laws of our condition. We are subject to grow aged, to become
weake and to fall sicke, in spight of all physicke. It is the first lesson the Mexicans give
their children; When they come out of their mothers wombes, they thus salute them: My
child, you are come into the world to suffer; Therefore suffer and hold your peace. It is
injustice for one to grieve, that any thing has befallen to any one, which may happen to
all men. Indignare, si quid in te inique proprie constitutum est: Then take it ill, if any
thing be decreed uniustl y against you alone.’ Looke on an aged man, who sueth unto God
to maintaine him in perfect, full and vigorous health; that is to say, he will be pleased to
make him yong again:
Stulte quid hæc frustra votis puerilibus optas? -- Ovid. Trist. iii. El. viii.
11.
Foole, why do you in vain desire,
With childish prayers thus t’ aspire?
Is it not folly? His condition will not bear it. The gowt, the stone, the gravell, and
indigestion are symptomes or effects of long-continued years; as heats, raines and winds,
are incident to long voyages. Plato cannot believe that Æsculapius troubled himself with
good rules and diet to provide for the preservation of life, in a weake, wasted, and
corrupted body; being unprofitable for his country, inconvenient for his vocation, and
unfit to get sound and sturdy Children; and deem not that care inconvenient unto divine
justice and heavenly Wisedome, which is to direct all things unto profit. My good sir, the
matter is at an end. You cannot be recovered; for the most, you can be but tampered
withall, and somewhat under propt, and for some hours have your misery prolonged.
Non secus instantem cupiens fulcire ruina

Diversis contra nititur obicibus,
Donec certa dies, omni compage soluta,
Ipsum cum rebus subruat auxilium. -- Corn. Gal. El. clxxiii.
So he that would an instant ruine stay
With diverse props strives it underlay,
Till all the frame dissolv’d a certain day,
The props with the edifice does oversway.
A man must learne to endure that patiently which he cannot avoyde conveniently. Our
life is composed, as is the harmony of the World, of contrary things; so of diverse tunes,
some pleasant, some harsh, some sharpe, some flat, some low, and some high. What
would that Musition say that should love but some one of them? He ought to know how to
use them severally and how to entermingle them. So should we both of goods and evils
which are consubstantiall to our life. Our being cannot subsist without this commixture,
whereto one side is no less necessary than the other. To go about to kicke against
natural necessity were to represent the folly of Ctesiphon, who undertook to strike or
wince with his mule. I consult but little about the alterations which I feel: For these kind
of men are advantagious when they hold you at their mercy. They glut your ears with
their Prognostications, and surprising me heretofore, when by my sicknesse I was brought
very low and weake, they have injuriously handled me with their Doctrines, positions,
prescriptions, magistrall fopperies, and prosopopeyall gravity; sometimes threatning me
with great pain and smart, and other times menacing me with near and unavoydable
death; All which did indeede move, stir and touch me near, but could not dismay or
remoove me from my place or resolution; If my judgement be thereby neither changed nor
troubled, it was at least hindred; It is ever in agitation and combating. Now I entreate my
imagination as gently as I can, and were it in my power I would cleane discharge it of all
pain and contestation. A man must further, help, flatter, and (if he can) cozen and deceive
it. My spirit is fit for that office: There is no want of apparances every where. Did he
persuade as he preacheth he should successefully ayde me. Shall I give you an example?
He tells me it is for my good that I am troubled with the gravell: That the compositions of
my age must naturally suffe some leake or flaw; It is time they begin to relent and
gainesay themselves: It is a common necessity, And it had been no new wonder for me.
Tha t way I pay the reward due unto age, and I could have no better reckoning of it. That
such company ought to comfort me, being fallen into the most ordinary accident incident
to men of my dayes. I every where see some afflicted with the same kind of evil, whose
society is honorable unto me, forasmuch as it commonly possesseth the better sort of
men, and whose essence has a certain nobility and dignity connexed unto it; That of men
tormented therewith, few are better cheape quit of it, and yet it costs them the pain of a
troublesome dyet, tedious regiment, and daily loathsome taking of medicinall drugges and
physicall potions; Whereas I meerely owe it to my good fortune; For some ordinary broths
made of Eringos or Sea-Holme, and Burstwort, which twice or thrice I have swallowed
down at the request of some Ladies, who, more kindely then my disease is unkind, offred

me the moity of theirs, have equally seemed unto me as easy to take as unprofitable in
operation. They must pay a thousand vows unto Æsculapius, and as many crownes to
their Physition, for an easy profluvion or aboundant running of gravell, which I often
receive by the benefit of nature. Let me be in any company, the decency of my
countenance is thereby nothing troubled, and I can hold my water full tenne hours and if
neede be as long as any man that is in perfect health. The fear of this evil, says he, did
heretofore affright you when yet it was unknown to you. The cries and despaire of those
who through their impatience exasperate the same, bred a horror of it in you. It is an evil
that comes and fals into those limbs by and with which you most most offended. Thou
art a man of concience:
Quæ venit indigne poena, dolenda venit. -- Ovid. Epist. v. 8.
The pain that comes without desart,
Comes to us with more grief and smart.
Consider but how mild the punishment is in respect of others, and how favourable.
Consider his slowenesse in coming, he only incommodeth that state and encombreth
that season of your life which (all things considered) is now become barren and lost, having
as it were by way of composition, given place unto the sensuall licenciousnesse and
wanton pleasures of your youth. The fear and pity men have of this evil may serve you
as a cause of glory; A quality whereof, if your judgement be purified and your discourse
perfectly sound, your friends do notwithstanding discover some sparkes in your
complexion. It is some pleasure for a man to hear others say of him, See there a patterne
of true fortitude; lo there a mirroiir of matchlesse patience. Thou art seen to sweate
with labor, to grow pale and wanne, to wax red, to quake and tremble, to cast and vomit
blood, to endure strange contractions, to brooke convulsions, to trill down brackish and
great tears, to make thicke, muddy, blacke, bloody, and fearefull urine, or to have it stopt
by some sharpe or rugged stone, which pricketh and cruelly wrin geth the necke of the
yarde, entertaining in the meane while the bystanders with an ordinary and undanted
countenance, by pawses jesting and by entermissions dallying with your servants, keeping a
part in a continued discourse, with words now and then excusing your griefs and abating
your painefull sufferance. Dost you remember those men of former ages, who, to keep
their virtue in breath and exercise, did with such greedinesse seek after evils? Suppose
Nature driveth and brings you unto that glorious School into which you hadst never
come of thine own accord and free will. If you tell me it is a dangerous and mortal evil,
what others are not so? For it is a kind of physicall cousenage to except any, and so they
go directly unto death; what matter it is whether they go by accident unto it, and easily
slide on either hand toward the way that leadeth us thereunto? But you diest not because
you are sicke; you diest because you are living. Death is able to kill you without the
helpe of any sicknesse; Sicknesses have to some prolonged their death, who have lived the
longer, inasmuch as they imagined they were still dying; Seeing it is of wounds as of
diseases, that some are medicinall and wholesome. The chollike is often no less long-

lived than you; Many are seen in whom it has continued even from their infancy unto
their extreamest age, who had they, not forsaken her company, she was like to have
assisted them further. You oftner kill her than she does you. And if she did present you
with the image of neer-imminent death, were it not a kind office for a man of that age to
reduce it unto the cogitations of his end? And which is worse, you hast no longer cause to
be cured; Thus and however common necessity calls for you against the first day.
Consider but how artificially and how mildely she brings you in distaste with life and out
of liking with the world, not forcing you with a tyrannical subjection as infinit other
diseases do, wherewith you seest old men possessed, which continually hold them
fettered and ensnared, and without release of weaknesse nor intermission of paines but by
advertisements and instructions, reprised by intervalles, entermixiiig certain pawses of
rest, as if it were to give you meane at your ease to meditate and repeat her lesson; To
give you leisure and ability to judge soundly, and like a man of a courage to take a
resolulution, she presents you with the state of your condition perfect, both in good and
evil, and in one same day sometimes a most pleasing, sometimes a most intolerable life.
If you embrace not death, at least you shakest her by the hand once a moneth; Whereby
you least more cause to hope that she will one aay surprise you without threatning; And
that being so often brought into the haven, supposing to be still in your accustomed state,
one morning at unawares, both your self and your confidence shall be transported over. A
man has no reason to complain against those diseases which so equally divide time with
health. I am beholding to Fortune that she so often assailes me with one same kind of
weapon: she by long use does fashion and enure me unto it, harden and habituate me
thereunto: I now know within a little which way and how I shall be quit. For want of
natural memory I frame some of paper, And when some new symptome or accident
commeth to my evil I set it down in writing, whence it proceedeth that having now (in a
manner) passed over and through all sorts of examples, if any astonishment threaten me,
running and turning over these my loose memorialles (as Sibyllæs leaves) I misse no more
to find to comfort me with some favourable prognostication in my former past
experience. Custome does also serve me to hope the better hereafter; For the conduct of
this distribution having so long been constituted, it is to be supposed that Nature will not
change this course, and no other worse accident shall follow then that I feel. Moreover,
the condition of this disease is not ill seeming to my ready and sodaine complexion. When
it but faintly assailes me it makes me afraid, because it is like to continue long; But
naturally it has certain vigorous and violent excesses; It does violently shake me for one
or two dayes. My reines have continued a whole age without alteration, an other is now
well-nigh come, that they have changed state. Evils as well as goods have their periods;
this accident is happily come to his last. Age weakneth the heat of my stomacke, his
digestion being thereby less perfect he sendeth this crude matter to my reines. Why may
not, at a certain revolution, the heat of my reines be likewise infeabled, so that they may
no longer putrifie my fleagme, and Nature addresse herself to find some other course of
purgation? Yeares have evidently made me drie up certain rheumes, and why not these
excrements that minister matter to the stone or gravell. But is there anything so pleasant in
respect of this sodaine change when by an extreaine pain I come by the voyding of my

stone, to recover, as from a lightning, the fair Sunne-shine of health; so free and full, as it
happeneth in our sodaine and most violent cholliks? Is there anything in this pain
suffered that may be counter poised to the sweet pleasure of so ready an amendment? By
how much more health seems fairer unto me after sicknesse, so near and so contiguous,
that I may know them in presence one of another, in their richest ornaments; wherein they
attyre themselves avy, as it were confront and counterchecke one another. Even as the
Stoices say, that Vices were profitably brought in, to give esteeme and make head unto
virtue; So may we with better reason and bold conjecture affirme that Nature has lent us
grief and pain, for the honor of pleasure and service of indolency. When Socrates
(after he had his yrons or fetters taken from him) felt the pleasure or tickling of that
itching which their weight and rubbing had caused in his legs, be rejoiced to consider
the near affinity that was between pain and pleasure; how they combined together by a
necessary bond, so that at times they enter-engender and succeed one another; and cry out
to good Æsope, that he should from that consideration have taken a proper body unto a
quaint fable. The worst I see in other diseases is, that they are not so grievous in their
effect as in their issue. A man is a whole yeare to recover himself; ever full of
weaknesse, alwayes full of fear. There is so much hazard and so many degrees before
one can be brought to safety, that he is never at an end. Before you can leave off your
coverchiefe and then your nightcap, before you can brooke the air again or leave leave
to drinke Wine, or lie with your Wife or eate melons, it is much if you fall not into some
relapse or new misery. The gravell has this priviledge, that it is cleane carried away;
Whereas other maladies leave ever some impression and alteration, which leaveth the
body susceptible or undertaking of some new infirmity, and they lend one an other their
hands. Such are to be excused, as are contented with the possession they have over us,
without extending the same, and without introducing their sequell; But curteous, kind and
gracious are those, whose passage brings some profitable consequence. Since I have had
the stone-chollike, I find myself discharged of other accidents; more (as me thinks) then
I was before, and never had ague since. I argue that the extreme and frequent vomits I
endure, purge me; and on the other side, the distastes and strange abstinences I tolerate,
disgest my offending humors; and Nature voydeth in these stones and gravell whatsoever
is superfluous and hurtful in her. Let no man tell me that it is a medicine too dear sold;
For, what avail so many loath-some pils, stincking potions, cauterizings, incisions,
sweatings, setons, dyets, and so diverse fashions of curing, which, because we are not able
to undergoe their violence and brooke their importunity, do often bring us unto our
graves? And therefore, when I am surprised, I take it as physicke; and when I am free, I
take it as a constant and full deliverance. See here an other particular favor of my disease,
which is, that he in a manner keepes his play a-part, and lets me keep my own; or else
I want but courage to do it. In his greatest emotion I have held out tenne hours on Horse-
backe with him. Doe but endure, you neede no other rule or refgiment. Play, dally, dyne,
run, be gamesome, do this, and if you can do the other thing, your disorder and
debauching will rather avail than hurt it. Say thus much to one that has the pox, or to
one that has the gowt, or to one that is belly-broken or cod-burst. Other infirmities have
more universall bonds, torment far-otherwise our actions, pervert all our order, and

engage all the state of mans life unto their consideration. Whereas this does only twitch
and pinch the skin, it neyther meddles with your understanding, nor with your will,
tongue, feete, nor hands, but leaves them all in your disposition; it rather rouzeth and
awaketh you, then deterre and drouzy you. The mind is wounded by the burning of a
feaver, suppressed by an Epilepsie, confounded by a migrane, and in conclusion astonied
and dismayed by all the diseases that touch or wound the whole masse of his body and its
noblest parts. This never meddles with it. If therefore it go ill with it, his be the blame she
bewrayeth, she forsaketh, and she displaceth herself. None but fools will be persuaded
that this hard, gretty and massie body, which is concocted and petrified in our kidneis,
maybe dissolved by drinks. And therefore after it is stirred there is no way but to give it
passage; For if you do not he will take it himself. This other peculiar commodity I
observe, that it is an infirmity wherein we have but little to divine. We are dispensed from
the trouble whereinto other maladies cast us, by the uncertainty of their causes, conditions,
and progresses. A trouble infinitly painfull. We have no need of doctorall consultations or
collegian interpretations. Our senses tell us where it is and what it is. By and with such
arguments, forcible or weake (as Cicero does the infirmity of his old-age), I endeavor to
lull asleepe and study to ammuse my imagination, and supple or annoint her sores. If they
grow worse, to morrow, to morrow we shall provide far new remedies or escapes. That
this is true, lo afterward again, perhaps the lightest motion wrings pure blood out of my
reines. And what of that? I omit not to stir as before, and with a youthfull and insolent
heate ride after my hound. And find that I have great reason of so important an accident,
which costs me but a deafe heaviness and dombe alteration in that part. It is some great
stone that wasteth and consumeth the substance of my kidneis and my life, which I avoyde
by little and little; not without some natural pleasure, as an excrement now superfluous
and trouble-some. And feel I something to shake? Expect not that I ammuse my self to
feel my pulse, or looke into my urine, thereby to find or take some tedious prevention. I
shall come time enough to feel the smart, without lengthening the same with the pain of
fear. Who feareth to suffer, suffereth already, because he feareth.
Seeing the doubt and ignorance of those who will and do meddle with expounding the
drifts and shifts of nature, with her internall progresse; and so many false prognostications
of their arte should make us understand her means infinitly unknown. There is great
uncertainty, variety and obscurity in that she promiseth and menaceth us. Except old-age,
which is an undoubted signe of deaths approching, of all other accidents, I see few signes
of future things whereon we may ground our divination. I only judge my self by true-
feeling sense, and not by discourse. To what end? since I will adde nothing thereunto
except attention and patience. Will you know what I gain by it? Behold those who do
otherwise, and who depend on so many diverse persuasions and counsels, how oft
imagination presseth them without the body. I have diverse times, being in safety and free
from all dangerous accidents, taken pleasure to communicate them into physicians, as but
then coming upon me. I endured the arrest or doom of their horrible conclusions, and
remained so much the more bounden unto God for his grace, and better instructed of the
vanity of this arte. Nothing ought so much be recommended unto youth as activity and
vigilancy. Our life is nothing but motion, I am hardly shaken, and am slow in all things, be

it to rise, to go to bed, or to my meales. Seaven of the clocke in the morning is to me an
early hour; And where I may command, I neither dine before eleven, nor sup till after six.
I have heretofore imputed the cause of agues or maladies, whereinto I have falne, to the
lumpish beavinesse or drowzy dulnesse which my long sleeping had caused me. And ever
repented me to fall asleepe again in the morning. Plato condemnes more the excess of
sleeping then the surfet of drinking. I love to lie hard and alone, indeed without a woman
by me, after the kingly manner; somewhat well and warme covered. I never had my bed
warmed, but since I came to be an old man, if need require, I have clothes given me to
warme my feete and my stomacke. Great Scipio was taxed to be a sluggard or heavy
sleeper (in my conceit) for no other cause but that men were offended; he only should
be the man in whom no fault might justly be found. If there be any curiosity in my
behaviour or manner of life, it is rather about my going to bed then any thing else; but if
neede be, I generally yield and accommodate my self unto necessity, as well and as
quietly as any other whosoever. Sleeping has possessed a great part of my life; and as old
as I am I can sleepe eight or nine hours together. I do with profit withdraw myself from
this sluggish propension and evidently find my self better by it. Indeede, I somewhat
feel the stroke of alteration, but in three dayes it is past. And I see few that live with less
(when need is), and that more constantly exercise themselves, nor whom toyling and
labor offend less. My body is capable of a firme agitation, so it be not vehement and
sodaine. I avoide violent exercises, and which induce me to sweate; my limbs will sooner
be wearied then heated. I can stand a whole day long, and am seldom weary with
walking. Since my first age, I ever loved rather to ride then walke upon paved streets.
Going a foote, I shall durty my self up to my waste; and little men, going alongst our
streets, are subject (for want of presentiall apparence) to be justled or elhowed. I love to
take my rest, be it sitting or lying-along, with my legs as high or higher then my seate. No
profession or occupation is more pleasing then the military; A profession or exercise both
noble in execution (for the strongest, most generous and prowdest of all vertues, is true
valor) and noble in its cause. No utility, either more just or universall then the protection
of the repose or defense of the greatness of ones country. The company and dayly
conversation of so many noble, young, and active men, cannot but be well-pleasing to
you; the dayly and ordinary sight of so diverse tragical spectacles; the liberty and
uncontroled freedome of that artelesse and unaffected conversation, masculine and
ceremonilesse manner of life; the hourely variety of a thousand ever changing and differing
actions; the courageous and mind stirring harmony of warlike music, which at once
entertaineth with delight and enflameth with longing, both your ears and your mind; the
imminent and matchlesse honor of that exercise; indeed the very sharpnesse and difficulty
of it, which Plato esteemeth so little, that in his imaginary commonwealth he imparteth
the same both to women and to children. As a voluntary Souldier or adventurous Knight
you enter the lists, the bands or particular hazards, according as your self judge of their
successes or importance; and you see when your life may therein be excusably employed.
Pulchrumque mori succurrit in armis. -- Virg. Æn. [ii]. 317.

And nobly it does come in mind,
To die in arms may honor find.
Basely to fear common dangers, that concerne so numberlesse a multitude, and not to
dare what so many men dare, indeed whole nations together, is only incident to base, craven,
and milke-sop-hearts. Company and good fellowshipp does harten and encorage children.
If some chance to exceed and outgoe you in knowledge, in experience, in grace, in
strength, in fortune, you have third and collaterall causes to blame and take hold-of; but to
yield to them in constancy of mind and resolution of courage, you have none but your
self to find fault with. Death is much more abject, languishing, grisly, and paineful in a
down-bed, then in a field-combate; and agues, catarres or apoplexies, as painefull and
mortal as an harquebusado. He that should be made undantedly to bear the accidents of
common life, should not nee4 to bumbast his courage, to become a man at arms. Vivere,
mi Lucilli, militare est: (Sen. Epist. xcvi. f.) ’Friend mine, to live is to go on war-fare.’
I cannot remember that ever I was scabbed, yet is itching one of natures sweetest
gratifications, and as ready at hand. But repentance does over-importunately attend on it. I
exercise the same in mine ears (and by fits) which within do often itch. I was borne with
al my senses sound, almost in perfection. My stomacke is commodiously good, and so is
my head; both which, together with my winde, maintaine themselves athwart my agues. I
have outlived that age to which some nations have not without some reason prescribed for
a just end unto life, that they allowed not a man to exceed the same. I have
notwithstanding some remyses or intermissions yet, though unconstant and short, so sound
and neate that there is little difference between them and the health and indolency of my
youth. I speak not of youthly vigor and chearefull blithnesse; there is no reason they
should follow me beyond their limits:
Non hæc amplius est liminis, aut aquæ
Coelestis, patiens latus. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. x. 15.
These sides cannot still sustain
Lying without doores, showring raine.
My visage and eyes do presently discover me. Thence begin all my changes, and
somewhat sharper then t hey are in effect. I often move my friends to pity ere I feel the
cause of it. My looking-glasse does not amaze me, for even in my youth it has diverse
times befalne me so to put-on a dusky looke, a wan colour, a troubled behaviour and of ill
presage, without any great accident; so that physicians perceiving no inward cause to
answer this outward alteration, ascribed the same to the secret mind or some concealed
passion, which inwardly gnawed and consumed me. They were deceived; were my body
directly by me, as is my my mind, we should march a little more at our ease. I had it
then, not only exempted from all trouble, but also full of satisfaction and blithenesse, as
it is most commonly, partly by its own complexion, and partly by its own design:

Nec vitiant artus ægræ contagia mentis. -- Ovid. Trist. iii. El. viii. 25.
Nor does sicke mindes infection
Pollute strong joints complexion.
I am of opinion that this her temperature has often raised my body from his fallings: he
is often suppressed, whereas she, if not lasciviously wanton, at least in quiet and reposed
estate. I had a quartan ague which held me foure or five moneths, and had altogether
disvisaged and altered my countenance, yet my mind held ever out, not only peaceably
but pleasantly. So I feel no pain or smart; weakenesse and languishing do not greatly
perplex me. I see diverse corporall defailances the only naming of which breede a kind of
horror, and which I would fear less then a thousand passions and agitations of the mind
which I see in use. I resolve to run no more; it sufficeth me to go-on fair and softly;
nor do I complain of their natural decadence or empairing that possesseth me.
Quis tumidum guttur miratur in Alpibus? -- Juven. Sat. xiii. 162.
Who wonders a swolne throate to see,
In those about the Alpes that be?
No more then I grieve that my o ntinuance is not as long and sound as that of an oake. I
have no cause to find fault with my imagination. I have in my life had very few thoughts
or cares that have so much as interrupted the course of my sleepe, except of desire to
awaken without dismay or afflicting me. I seldom dreame, and when I do, it is of
extravagant things and chymeras, commonly produced of pleasant conceits, rather
ridiculous then sorrowfull. And think it true that dreames are the true interpreters of our
inclinations; but great skill is required to sort and understand them.
Res quæ invita usurpant homines, cogitant, curant, vident,
Quæque agunt vigilantes, agitantque ea sicut in somno accidunt
Minus mirandum est.
It is no wonder if the things which we
Care-for, use, think, do-oft, or waking see,
Unto us sleeping represented be.
Plato says, moreover, that it is the office of wisdom to draw divining instructions
from them against future times. Wherein I see nothing but the wonderful experience that
Socrates, Xenophon, and Aristotle relate of them - men of unreproovable authority.
Histories report that the inhabitants of the Atlantique Iles never dreame, who feed on
nothing that has been slain. Which I adde, because it is perhaps the occasion they
dreame not. Pythagoras ordained therefore a certain methode of feeding, that dreames

might be sorted of some purpose. Mine are tender, and cause no agitation of body or
expression of voice in me. I have in my dayes seen many strangely stirred with them.
Theon the Philosopher walked in dreaming; and Pericles his boy, went upon the tiles and
top of houses. I stand not much on nice choice of meates at the table, and commonly begin
with the first and neerest dish, and leape not willingly from one taste to another. Multitude
of dishes and variety of services displease me as much as any other throng. I am easily
pleased with few messes, and hate the opinion of Favorinus, that at a banquet you must
have that dish whereon you feed hungerly taken from you, and ever have a new one set in
the place: And that it is a niggardly supper if all the guests be not glutted with pinions and
rumps of diverse kinds of fowle, and that only the dainty bird becoafico or snapfig
deserveth to be eaten whole at one morsell. I feede much upon salt cates, and love to
have my bread somewhat fresh. And my own Baker makes none other for my bord,
against the fashion of my country. In my youth my overseers had much a do to reforme
the refusall I made of such meats as youth does commonly love best; as sweet meates,
confets and marchpanes. My Tutor was wont to find great fault with my lothing of such
dainties, as a kind of squeamish delicacy. And to say truth, it is nothing but a difficulty of
taste, where it once is applyed. Whosoever remooveth from a child a certain particular or
obstinate affection to browne bread, to bakon, or to garlike, taketh friandize from him.
There are some that make it a labor and think it a patience to regret a good piece of
pawdred beefe, or a good gemmon of bakon, amongst partridges. Are not they wise men
in the meane time? It is the chief dainty of all dainties; It is the taste of nice effeminate
fortune that wil be distasted with ordinary and usual things. Per quæ luxuria divitiarum
tædio ludit: ’Whereby the lavishnesse of plenty playes with tedious pleasure.’ To for-bear
to make good cheare, because another does it, for one to have care of his feeding, is the
essence of that vice.
Si modica cænere times olus omne patella. -- Hor. i. Ep. v. 2.
If in a sorry dish to sup
You brooke not all the hearbe pottage up.
Indeede there is this difference, that it is better for one to tye his desires unto things
easiest to be gotten, yet is it a vice to tie himself to any strictnesse. I was heretofore wont
to name a kinsman of mine over-delicate, because while he lived in our Gallies, he had
unlearn’t and left to lie upon a bedde and to strippe himself to go to bedde. Had I any
male children I should willingly wish them my fortune. That good Father it pleased God
to allot me (who has nothing of me but thankefulnesse for his goodnesse, which indeed
is as great as great may be) even from my cradle sent me to be brought-up in a poore
village of his, where he kept me so long as I suckt, and somewhat longer, breeding me
after the meanest and simplest-common fashion. Magna pars libertatis est moratus
venter: (Sen. Epist. cxxiii.) ’A mannerly belly is a great part of a mans liberty.’ Never take
unto your self, and much less never give your wives the charge of your childrens
breeding or education. Let fortune frame them under the popular and natural laws; Let

custom enure them to frugality and breed them to hardnesse: That they may rather
descend from sharpenesse than ascend unto it. His conceipt aymed also at another end, To
acquaint and ready me with that people and condition of men that have most need of us;
And thought I was rather bound to respect those which extend their arms unto me than
such as turn their backe toward me. And that was the reason he chose no other gossips to
hold me at the font than men of abject and base fortune, that so I might the more be bound
and tied unto them. His purpose has not altogether succeded ill. I willingly give and
accost my self unto the meaner sort, whether it be because there is more glory gotten by
them, or through some natural compassion, which in me is infinitely powerfull. The
faction which I condemne in our civill wars I shall more sharpely condemne when it
prospers and flourisheth. I shall in some sort be reconciled unto it when I see it miserably-
depressed and overwhelmed. Oh how willingly do I remember that worthy humor of
Chelonis, daughter and wife to King of Sparta. While Cleombrotus, her husband, in the
tumultuous disorders of his City, had the upper-hand of Leonidas her father, she played
the part of a good daughter, allying herself with her father in his exile and in his misery,
mainely opposing herself against the Conquerour. Did fortune turn? So changed she her
mind, courageously taking her hushand’s part: Whom she never forsooke, whither-soever
his ruine or distresse carryed him. Having (in my seeming) no other choise than to follow
that side where she might do most good, where she was most wanted, and where she
might show herself most truely pitiful. I do more naturally encline toward the example
of Flamineus, who more and rather yielded to such as had need of him than to those who
might do him good, than I bend unto that of Pyrrhus, who was ever wont demissely to
stoop and yield to the mighty and insolently to grow proud over the weake. Long sitting
at meales does much weary and distemper me, for be it for want of better countenance and
entertainment, or that I used my self unto it when I was a child, I feede as long as I sitte
at the table. And therefore, being in my own house, though my board be but short and
that we use not to sit long, I do not commonly sit down with the first, but a pretty while
after others: According to the form of Augustus, yet I imitate him not in his rising before
others. Contrary, I love to sit a great while after, and to hear some discourse or table-
talk. Alwayes provided I bear not a part my self, for if my belly be full I shall soone
be weary and hurt my self with talking, and I find the exercise of lowde-speaking and
contesting before meate very pleasant and wholesome. The ancient Greeks and Romanes
had better reason than we, allotting unto feeding, which is a principal action of mans life
(if any other extraordinary business did not let or divert them from it), diverse hours, and
the best part of the night, eating and drinking more leisurely than we do, who pass and
run-over all our actions in posthaste, and extending this natural pleasure unto more
leisure and use, entermixing therewith diverse profitable and mind-pleasing offices of civill
conversation. Such as have care of me may easily steale from me what soever they
imagine may be hurtful for me, inasmuch as about my feeding I never desire or find fault
wit h that I see not. That Proverb is verified in me: what eye seeth not, the heart rueth not.
But if a dish or any thing else be once set before me, they lose their labor that go about
to tell me of abstinence; so that when I am disposed to fast I must be sequestred from
eaters, and have no more set before me than may serve for a stinted and regular collation;

for if I but sit down at a set table I forget my resolution. If I chance to bidde my cooke
change the dressing of some kind of meate or dish, all my men know I inferre my appetit
is wallowish and my stomache out of order, and I shall hardly touch it. I love all manner
of flesh or fowle but greene rosted and raw sodden, namely, such as may bear it without
danger, and love to have them thoroughly mortified, and in diverse of them the very
alteration of their smell. Only hardnesse or toughnesse of meate does generally molest
me, (of all other qualities I am as carelesse and can as well brooke them as any man that
ever I knew,) so that (contrary to received opinion) even amongst fishes I shall find some
both too new and over-hard and firme. It is not the fault or want of teeth, which I ever had
as perfectly-sound and compleate as any other man, and which but now, being so olde,
beginne to threaten me. I have from my infancy learn’d to rubbe them with my napkin,
both in the morning when I rise and sitting down and rising from the table. God does them
a grace from which by little and little he does substract from them their life. It is the only
benefit of old age. Their last death shall be so much the less full, languishing and
painefull, it shal then kill but one halfe or a quarter of a man. Even now I lost one of my
teeth, which of itself fell out without strugling or pain: it was the natural terme of its
continuance. That part of my being with diverse others, are already dead and mortified in
me, others of the most active, halfe dead, and which during the vigor of my age held the
first rank. Thus I sinke and scape from my self. What foolishnes will it be in my
understanding to feel the start of that fall, already so advanced, as it were perfectly
whole? I hope it not; verely I receive a speciall comfort in thinking on my death, and that
it will be of the most just and natural, and cannot now require or hope other favor of
destiny concerning that then unlawfull. Men persuade themselves that, as heretofore they
have had a higher stature, so their lives were longer; But they are deceived, for Solon, of
those ancient times, though be were of an exceeding high stature, his life continued but
seventy yeeres. Shal I, that have so much and so universally adored that αριοτου
ετρον, a meane is best, of former times, and have ever taken a meane measure for the
most perfect, therefore pretend a most prodigious and unmeasureable life? whatsoever
commeth contrary to Natures course may be combersome, but what comes according to
her should ever please. Omnia quæ secundum naturam fiunt, sunt habenda in bonis: ’All
things are to be accompted good that are done according to nature.’ And therefore, (says
Plato), is that death violent which is caused either by wounds or sicknesses; but that of all
others the easiest and in some sort delitious which surpriseth us by means of age. Vitam
adolescentibus vis aufert, senibus maturitas: ’A forcible violence takes their life from the
young, but a ri pe maturity from the old.’ Death entermedleth and every where confounds
itself with our life; declination does preoccupate her hour and insinuate itself in the
very course of our advancement. I have pictures of my own that were drawne when I
was five and twenty, and others being thirty yeeres of age, which I often compare with
such as were made by me as I am now at this instant. How many times do I say I am no
more my self; how much is my present image further from those then from that of my
decease? It is an over-great abuse unto nature to dragge and hurry her so far that she
must be forced to give us over, and abandon our conduct, our eyes, our teeth, our legs
and the rest, to the mercy of a forraine help and begged assistance; and to put ourselves

into the hands of art, weary to follow it. I am not over-much or greedily desirous of sallets
or of fruits, except melons. My father hated all manner of sawces; I love them all. Over-
much eating does hurt and distemper me, but for the quality I have yet no certain
knowledge that any meate offends me; I never observe either a full or waned Moone, nor
make a difference betweene the Spring time or Autumne. There are certain inconstant
and unknown motions in us. For (by way of example) I have heretofore found redish-
rootes to be very good for me, then very hurtful, and now again very well agreeing with
my stomacke. In diverse other things I feel my appetit to change , and my stomacke to
diversifie from time to time. I have altred my course of drinking, sometimes from white to
claret wine, and then from claret to white again.
I am very friand and gluttonous of fish, and keep my shroving dayes upon fish dayes,
and my feasts upon fasting-dayes. I believe as some others do, that fish is of lighter
digestion than flesh. As I make it a conscience to eate flesh upon a fish day, so does my
taste to eate fish and flesh together. Tbe diversity betweene them seems to me over-
distant. Even from my youth I was wont now and then to steale some repast, either that I
might sharpen my stomake against the next day; (for as Epicurus was wont to fast, and
made but sparing meales, thereby to accustome his voluptuousness to neglect plenty; I,
contrary to him, to enure my sensuality to speede the better, and more merrily to make use
of plenty) or else I fasted, the better to maintaine my vigor for the service or performance
of some bodily or mental action; for both are strangely dulled and ideled in me, through
over-much fulnesse and repleatnesse. (And above all I hate that foolish combination of so
sound and bucksome a Goddesse with that indigested and belching God, all puffed with
the fume of his liquor) or to recover my crazed stomake, or because I wanted some good
company. And I say as Epicurus said, that A man should not so much respect what he
eateth as with whom he eateth. And commend Chilon, that he would not promise to come
to Perianders feast before he knew certainely who were the other bidden guests. No
viands are so sweetly pleasing, no sauce so tastefull, as that which is drawne from
conversable and mutual society. I think it wholesome to eate more leisurely, and less in
quality, and to feede oftner; But I will have appetit and hunger to be endeared. I should
find no pleasure, after a phisicall manner, to swallow three or foure forced and spare
meales a day. Who can assure me, if I have a good taste or stomacke in the morning, that I
shall have it again at supper? Let us old men, let us, I say, take the first convenient time
that commeth; Let us leave hopes and prognostikes unto Almanacke-makers. The
extreme fruit of my health is pleasure; Let us hold fast on the present, and to us known.
I eschew constancy in these Lawes of fasting. Who so will have a form to serve him, let
him avoyd continuance of it; but we harden ourselves unto it and thereunto wholly apply
our forces: sixe moneths after, you shall find your stomacke so enured unto it, that you
shall have gotten nothing but this, to have lost the liberty to use it otherwise without
domage. I use to go with my legs and thighs no more covered in Sommer than in
Winter, for I never weare but one pair of single silke stockins. For the easing of my
rhume and helpe of my chollike, I have of late used to keep my head and belly warme.
My infirmities did in few dayes habituate themselves thereunto, and disdained my
ordinary provisions: From a single night-cappe I came to a double coverchef, and from a

bonnet to a lined and quilted hat. The bumbasting of my doublet serves me now for no
more use than a stomacher; it is a thing of nothing, unless I adde a hare or a vulture’s skin
to it, and some warme wrapping about my head. Follow this gradation, and you shall go a
fair pace. I will do no such thing. If I durst I could find in my hart to revoke the
beginning I have given unto it. Fall you into any ne w inconvenience? This reformation
will no longer avail you. You are so accustomed unto it that you are driven to seek some
new one. So are they overthrowne that suffer themselves with forced formalities or strict
rules to be intangled, and do superstitiously constraine themselves unto them: they have
need of more, and of more after that: they never come to an end. It is much more
commodious both for our business and for our pleasure (as did our forefathers) to lose
our dinner, and deferre making of good cheere onto the hour of withdrawing and of rest,
without interrupting the day: So was I wont to do heretofore. I have for my health found
out since by experience, that on the contrary it is better to dine, and that one shall digest
better being awake. Whether I be in health or in sicknesse, I am not much subject to be
thirsty; indeede my mouth is somewhat dry, but without thirst. And commonly I use not to
drinke, but when with eating I am forced to desire it, and that is when I have eaten well.
For a man of an ordinary stature I drinke indifferent much. In Sommer, and at a hungry
meale, I not only exceed the limits of Augustus, who drunke but precisely three times;
but, not to offend the rule of Democritus, who forbade us to stay at foure as an unlucky
number, if need be, I come to five: Three demisextiers, or thereabouts. I like little glasses
best; and I love to empty my glasse, which some others dislike, as a thing unseemely.
Sometimes and that very often, I temper my wine one halfe and many times three parts
with water. And when I am in my own house, from an ancient custom which my
fathers Physitian ordained both for him and himself, looke what quantity of Wine is
thought will serve me a meale, the same is commonly tempered two or three hours
before it be served in, and so kept in the celler. It is reported that Cranaus, King of the
Athenians, was the first that invented the mingling of Wine with Water. Whether it were
profitable or no, I will not now dispute or stand upon. I think it more decent and more
wholesome that children should drinke no Wine until they be past the age of sixteene or
eighteene years. The most usual and common form of life is the best: Each particularity
does in mine opinion impugne it. And I should as much detest a Germane that should put
Water in his Wine, as a French-man that should drinke it pure. Publike custom gives
Law unto such things. I fear a foggy and thicke air, and shunne smoke more than death
(the first thing I began to repair when I came to be maister of my own house, was the
chimnies and privies, which in most of our buildings is a general and intollerable fault);
and [among] mischiefes and difficulties attending on Warre, there is none I hate more than
in hot-sweltring wether to ride up and down all the day long in smoky dust, as many
times our Soldiers are faine to do. I have a free and easy respiration, and do most
commonly pass over my murres and colds without offence to my lungs, or without
coughing. The soultry heate of sommer is more offensive to me than the sharpnesse of
Winter; for, Besides the incommodity of heat, which is less to be remedied than the
inconvenience of cold, and besides the force of the Sunnes beames, which strike into the
head, mine eyes are much offended with any kind of glittring or sparkling light, so that I

cannot well sit at dinner over against a clear-burning fire. To allay or dim the whiteness
of paper, when I was most given to reading, I was wont to lay a piece of greene glasse
upon my book, and was thereby much eased. Hitherto I never used spectacles, nor know
not what they meane; and can yet see as far as ever I could, and as any other man; true it
is, that when night comes, I begin to perceive a dimnes and weakenesse in reading, the
continuall exercise whereof, and specially by night, was ever somewhat troublesome unto
mine eyes. See here a steppe-backe, and that very sensible. I shall recoyle [one] more
from a second to a third, and from a third to a fourth, so gently, that before I feel the
declination and age of my sight I must be stark blinde. So artificially do the Fates
untwist our lives-threede. Yet am I in doubt that my hearing is about to become thicke,
and you shall see that I shall have lost it halfe when yet I shall find fault with their
voyces that speak unto me. The mind must be strained to a high pitch to make it
perceive how it declineth. My going is yet very nimble, quick, and stout; and I wot not
which of the two I can more hardly stay at one instant, either my mind or my body. I
must like that preacher well that can tie mine attention to a whole sermon. In places of
ceremonies, where every man does so nicely stand upon countenance, where I have seen
Ladies hold their eyes so steady, I could never so hold out, but some part of mine would
ever be gadding; although I be sitting there, I am not well settled. As Chrysippus the
Phylosophers chambermaide said of her Master, that he was never drunke but in his
legs; for whersoever he sate, he was ever accustomed to be wagging with them; and this
she said at what time store of Wine had made his companions cuppe-shotten, and yet he
felt no alteration, but continued sober in mind; It might likewise have been said of me,
that even from mine infancy I had either folly or quickesilver in my feete, so much stirring
and natural inconstancy have I in them where ever I place them. It is unmannerlinesse
and prejudiciall unto health, indeed to pleasure also, to feede grosely and greedily as I
do. I shall sometimes through haste bite my tongue and fingers ends. Diogenes meeting
with a child that did eate so, gave his tutor a whirret on the eare. There were men in
Rome that as others teach youth to go with a good grace, so they taught men to chew with
decency. I do sometimes lose the leisure to speak, which is so pleasing an entertainment
at the table, provided they be discourses short, witty, and pleasant. There is a kind of
jelousie and envy betweene our pleasures, and they often shocke and hinder one another.
Alcibiades, a man very exquisitely-skilfull in making good cheere, inhibited all manner of
music at tables, because it should not hinder the delight of discourses, for the reason
which Plato affords him, that it is a custom of popular or base men to call for minstrels
or singers at feasts, and an argument they want witty or good discourses and pleasing
entertainment, wherewith men of conceipt and understanding know how to enterfeast and
entertaine themselves. Varro requireth this at a banket, an assembly of persons, fair,
goodly, and handsome of presence, affable and delightfull in conversation, (which must
not be dumbe nor dull, sullaine nor slovenly), cleanlinesse and neatnesse in meates, and
fair wether. A good mind-pleasing table-entertainement is not a little voluptuous feast,
nor a meanly artificiall banquet. Neither great or stern commanders in Warres, nor
famous or strict Philosophers, have disdained the use or knowledge of it. My imagination
has bequeathed three of them to the keeping of my memory only, which fortune did at

severall times yield exceedingly delightsome unto me. My present state does now exclude
me from them. For every one, according to the good temper of body or mind wherein he
finds himself, addeth either principal grace or taste unto them. My self, who but grovell
on the ground, hate that kind of human Wisedome which would make us disdainful and
enemies of the bodies reformation. I deem it an equall injustice either to take natural
sensualities against the hart, or to take them too near the hart. Xerxes was a ninny-
hammer, who, enwrapped and given to all humane voluptuousness, proposed rewards for
those that should devise such as he had never heard of. And he is not much behind him in
sottishnesse that goes about to abridge those which nature has devised for him. One
should neither follow nor avoyd them, but receive them. I receive them somewhat more
amply and graciously, and rather am contented to follow natural inclination. We need not
exaggerate their inanity, it will sufficiently be felt and does sufficiently produce itself.
Godamercy our weake, crazed, and joy-diminishing spirit, which makes us distaste both
them and himself. He treateth both himself and whatsoever he receiveth, sometimes
forward and other times backeward, according as himself is either insaciate, vagabond,
new fangled, or variable.
Sincerum est nisi vas, quodcanque infundis acescit. --- Hor. i. Epist. ii. 54.
In no sweet vessell all you poure,
In such a vessell soone will sowre.
My self, who brag so curiously to embrace and particularly to allow the commodities
of life, whensoever I looke precisely into it, I find nothing therein but winde. But what?
we are nothing but winde. And the very winde also, more wisely then we loves to bluster
and to be in agitation: And is pleased with his own offices, without desiring stability or
solidity, qualities that be not his own. The meere pleasures of imagination, as well as
displeasure (say some) are the greatest, as the balance of Critolaus did express. It is no
wonder she composeth them at her pleasure, and cuts them out of the whole cloath. I see
dayly some notable presidents of it, and perhaps to be desired. But I, that am of a
commixt condition, homely and plaine, cannot so thoroughly bite on that only and so
simple object, but shall grosely and carelesly give myself over to the present delights of
the general and humane law, intellectually sensible and sensibly-intellectuall. The
Cyrenaique Philosophers are of the opinion that as griefes, so corporall pleasures are more
powerfull, and as double, so more just. There are some (as Aristotle says) who, with a
savage kind of stupidity, will seem distastefull or squemish of them. Some others I
know that do it out of ambition. Why renounce they not also breathing? why live they not
of their own, and refuse light, because it commeth of gratuity and costs them neither
invention nor vigor? That Mars, or Pallas, or Mercurie should nourish them to see,
instead of Ceres, Venus, or Bacchus? Will they not seek for the quadrature of the circle
even upon their wives? I hate that we should be commanded to have our minds in the
clouds whilst our bodies are sitting at the table; yet would I not have the mind to be
fastned thereunto, nor wallow upon it, nor lie along thereon, but apply itself and sit at it.

Aristippus defended but the body, as if we had no soul; Zeno embraced but the soul, as
if we had no body. Both viciously. Pythagoras (say they) has followed a Philosophie all
in contemplation; Socrates altogether in manners and in action; Plato has found a
mediocrity between both. But they say so by way of discourse. For the true temperature is
found in Socrates, and Plato is more Socratical then Pythagorical, and it becomes him
best. When I dance, I dance; and when I sleepe, I sleepe. And when I am solitarie walking
in a fair orchard, if my thoughts have a while entertained themselve with strange
occurrences, I do another while bring them to walke with me in the orchard, and to be
partakers of the pleasure of that solitarinesse and of my self. Nature has like a kind
mother observed this, that such actions as she for our necessities has enjoyned unto us
should also be voluptuous unto us. And does not only by reason but also by appetite
envite us unto them; it were injustice to corrupt her rules. When I behold Cæsar and
Alexander in the thickest of their wondrous great labours so absolutely to enjoy humane
and corporall pleasures, I say not that they release thereby their mind, but rather
strengthen the same, submitting by vigor of courage their violent occupation and laborious
thoughts to the customary use of ordinary life. Wise had they been had they beleeved that
that was their ordinary vocation and this their extraordinary. What egregious fools are we?
He has passed his life in idleness, say we; alas! I have done nothing this day. What,
have you not lived? It is not only the fundamentall, but the noblest of your occupation.
Had I been placed or thought fit for the managing of great affairs, I would have showed
what I could have performed. Have you knowen how to meditate and mannage your life?
you have accomplished the greatest work of all. For a man to show and exploit himself
nature has no neede of fortune; she equally shewes herself upon all grounds, in all sutes,
before and behinde, as it were without curteines, welt, or gard. Have you known how to
compose your manners? you have done more than he who has composed bookes. Have
you known how to take rest? you have done more than be who has taken Empires and
Citties. The glorious masterpiece of man is to live to the repulse. All other things - as to
raigne, to governe, to board up treasure, to thrive, and to build - are for the most part but
appendixes and supports therunto. It is to you a great pleasure to see a General of an
army at the foote of a breach, which ere long intendeth to charge or enter, all whole,
undistracted, and carelesly to prepare, himself, while he sits at dinner with his friends
about him, to talk of any matter. And I am delighted to see Brutus, having both heaven
and earth conspired against him and the liberty of Rome, by stealth to take some hours of
the night from his other cares, and walking of the round, in al security to read, to note,
and to abbreviate Polibius. It is for base and petty minds, dulled and overwhelmed with
the weight of affairs, to be ignorant how to leave them, and not to know how to free
themselves from them, nor how to leave and take them again.
O fortes pejoraque passi,
Mecum sæpe viri, nunc vino pellite curas,
Cras ingens iterabimus æquor. -- Hor. Car. i. Od. vii. 30.
Valiant compeeres, who oft have worse endured

With me, let now with wine your cares be cured:
To morrow we again
Will launch into the main.
Whether it be in jest or earnest that the Sorbonicall or theologicall wine and their feasts
or gaudy dayes are now come to be proverbially jested at, I think there is some reason
that by how much more profitably and seriously they have bestowed the morning in the
exercise of their schooles, so much more commodiously and pleasantly should they dine
at noone. A clear conscience to have well employed and industriously spent the other
hours is a perfect seasoning and savoury condiment of tables. So have wise men lived.
And that inimitable contention unto virtue which so amazeth us in both Catoes, their so
strictly-severe humor, even unto importunity, has thus mildly submitted my self, and
taken pleasure in the laws of humane condition and in Venus and Bacchus. According to
their Sects precepts, which require a perfectly wise man to be fully expert and skillfull in
the true use of sensualities, as in other duties or devoires belonging to life. Cui cor sapiat
ei et sapiat palatus: (Cic. Fin. ii.) ’Let his palate be savoury whose heart is savoury.’
Easie-yielding and facility does, in my conceit, greatly honor and is best befitting a
magnanimous and noble mind. Epaminondas thought it no scorne to thrust himself
amongst the boyes of his citie and dance with them, indeed, and to sing and play, and with
attention busie himself, were it in things that might derogate from the honor and
reputation of his glorious victories, and from the perfect reformation of manners that was
in him. And amongst so infinite admirable actions of Scipio the grand father, a man
worthy to be esteemed of heavenly race, nothing addeth so much grace unto him as to see
him carelesly to dallie and childishly to trifle in gathering and chusing of cockle-shels, and
play at cost castle along the seashoare with his friend Lælius; and if it were fowle weather,
amusing and solacing himself to represent in writing and comedies the most popular and
base actions of men. And having his heade continually busied with that wonderful
enterprise against Hanibal and Affricke, yet he still visited the schooles in Cicily, and
frequented the lectures of Philosopby, arming his enemies teeth at Rome with envy and
spight. Nor any thing more remarkeable in Socrates, then when, being old and crazed, he
would spare so much time as to be instructed in the art of dancing and playing upon
instruments, and thought the time well bestowed. Who, notwithstanding, has been seen to
continue a whole day and night in an extasie or trance, indeed ever standing on his feet in
presence of all the Greeke army, as it were surprised and ravished by some deep and
mind-distracting thought. He has been noted to be the first amaongst so infinite valiant
men in the army headlong to rush out to helpe and bring-off Alcibiades, engaged and
enthronged by his enemies, to cover him with his body, and by main force of arms and
courage bring him off from the rout; And in the Deliane battle to save and disingage
Xenophon, who was beaten from his horse. And in the midst of all the Athenian people
wounded, as it were, with so unworthy a spectacle, headlong present himself to the first
man to recover Theramenes from out of the hands of the officers and satelites of the thirty
tyrants of Athens, who were leading him to his death, and never desisted from his hold
attempt until he met with Theramenes himself, though he were followed and assisted

with two more. He has been seen (provoked thereunto by a matchlesse beauty,
wherewith he was richly endowed by nature) at any time of neede to maintaine severe
continency. He has continually been noted to march to the wars on foote, to breake
the ice with his bare feete, to weare one same garment in summer and winter, to exceed all
his companions in patience of any labor or travell, to eate no more or otherwise at any
banquet then at his ordinary. He has been seen seven and twenty years together, with
one same undismaid countenance, patiently to bear and endure hunger, poverty, the
indocility and stubbornerse of his children, the frowardnes and scratchings of his wife;
and in the end malicious detraction, tyranny, enprysonment, shakels, and poyson. But was
that man envited to drinke to him by duty of civility? he was also the man of the army to
whom the advantage thereof remained? And yet be refused not, nor dis-dained to play for
nuts with children, nor to run with them upon a hobby-horse, wherein he had a very good
grace; For all actions (says Philosophy) do equally beseeme well and honor a wise
man. We have good ground and reason, and should never be weary to present the image
of this incomparable man unto al patternes and formes of perfections. There are very few
examples of life absolutely full and pure. And our instruction is greatly wronged in that it
has certain weak, defective, and unperfect formes proposed unto it, scarcely good for
any good use, which divert and draw us backe, and may rather be termed corrupters then
correcters. Man is easily deceived. One may more easily go by the sides, where extremity
serveth as bound, as a stay and as a guide, then by the midway, which is open and wide,
and more according unto art then according unto nature, but therewithall less nobly and
with less commendation. The greatness of the mind is not so much to drawe up and
hale forward, as to know how to range, direct, and circumscribe itself. It holdeth for
great whatsover is sufficient. And sheweth her height in loving meane things better then
eminent. There is nothing so goodly, so fair, and so lawfull, as to play the man well and
duely; Nor Science so hard and difficult as to know how to live this life well. And of all
the infirmities we have the most savage is to despise our being. Whoso will sequester or
distract his mind, let him hardily do it, if he can, at what time his body is not well at
ease, thereby to discharge it from that contagion. And elsewhere contrary, that she may
assist and favor him, and not refuse to be partaker of his natural pleasures, and
continually be pleased with them; adding thereunto, if she be the wiser, moderation, lest
through indiscretion they might be confounded with [dis]pleasure. Intemperance is the
plague of sensuality, and temperance is not her scourge, but rather her seasoning.
Eudoxus, who thereon established his chief felicity, and his companions that raised the
same to so high a pitch by means of temperance, which in them was very singular and
exemplar, savored the same in her most gracious sweetness. I enjoin my mind, with a
looke equally regular, to behold both sorrow and voluptuousness; Eodem enim vitio est
effugio animi in lætitia, quo in dolore contractio: (Cic. Tusc. Qu. iv.) “As faulty is the
enlarging of the mind in mirth, as the contracting it in grief;” and equally constant: But
the one merrily and the other severely; And according to that she may bring unto it, to be
as careful to extinguish the one, as diligent to quench the other. To have a perfect insight
into a good, draws with it an absolute insight into evil. And sorrow has in her tender
beginnning something that is unavoydable, and voluptuousness in her excessive end

something that is evitable. Plato coupleth them together, and would have it to be the
equall office of fortitude to combat against sorrowes, and fight against the immoderate
and charming blandishments of sensuality. They are two fountaines at which whoso
draweth, whence, when, and as much as he needeth, be it a city, be it a man, be it a beast,
he is very happy. The first must be taken for physicke and necessity, and more sparingly;
The second for thirst, but not unto drunkennesse. Paine, voluptuousness, love and hate,
are the first passions a child feeleth; if reason approach, and they apply themselves unto
it, that is virtue. I have a Dictionary severally and wholly to my self. I pass the time
when it is foul and incommodious; when it is fair and good I will not pass it. I run it
over again, and take hold of it. A man should run the badde, and settle himself in the
good. This vulgar phrase of pass time and to pass the time, represents the custom of
those wise men who think to have no better account of their life then to pass it over and
escape it; to pass it over and bawke it, and so much as in them lyeth to ignore and avoyd
it, as a thing of an yrkesome, tedious, and to be disdained quality. But I know it to be
otherwise, and find it to be both priseable and commodious, indeed in her last declination,
where I hold it. And Nature has put the same into our hands, furnished with such and so
favourable circumstances that if it press and molest us, or if unprofitably it escape us, we
must blame ourselves. Stulti vita ingrata est, trepida est, tota in futurum fertur: (Sen.
Epist. xv.) ’A fooles life is all pleasant, all fearefull, all fond of the future.’ I therefore
prepare and compose my self to forgoe and lose it without grudging; but a thing that is
loseable and transitory by its own condition, not as troublesome and importunate. Nor
beseemes it a man to be grieved when he dieth,except they be such as please themselves
to live still. There is a kind of husbandry in knowing how to enjoy it. I enioy it double to
others. For the measure in jovissance dependeth more or less on the application we lend
it. Especially at this instant, that I perceive mine to be short in time, I wil extend it in
weight; I wil stay the readines of her flight by the promptitude of my holdfast by it, and by
the vigor of custom recompense the haste of her fleeting. According as the possession of
life is more short, I must endeavour to make it more profound and full. Other men feel
the sweetness and contentment and prosperity. I feel it as well as they, but it is not in
passing and gliding; yet should it be studied, tasted and ruminated, thereby to yield it
condigne thanks, that it pleased to grant the same unto us. They enjoy other pleasures, as
that of sleep without knowing them. To the end that sleepe should not dully and
unfeelingly escape me, and that I might better taste and be acquainted with it, I have
heretofore found it good to be troubled and interrupted in the same. I have a kind of
contentment to consult with my self, which consultation I do [not] superficially run
over, but considerately sound the same, and apply my reason to entertaine and receive it,
which is now become froward, peevish and distasted. Doe I find my self in some quiet
moode? is there any sensuality that tickles me? I do not suffer the same to busie itself
or dally about sences, but associate my mind unto it. Not to engage or plunge itself
therein, but therein to take delight; not to lose, but therein to find itself. And for her part
I employ her to view herself in that prosperous state, to ponder and esteeme the good
fortune she has, and to amplifle the same. She measureth how much she is beholding
unto God, for that she is at rest with her conscience, and free from other [in]testine

passions, and has in her body her natural disposition; orderly and competently enjoying
certain flattering and effeminate functions, with which it pleaseth him of his grace to
recompence the griefes wherewith his justice at his pleasure smiteth us. Oh, how availfull
is it unto her to be so seated, that [wher]ever she casteth her eyes, the heavens are calme
round about her, and no desire, no fear, or doubt, troubleth the air before her; here is no
difficulty, either past, or present, or to come, over which her imagination passeth no[t]
without offence. This consideration takes a great lustre from the comparison of different
conditions. Thus do I in a thousand shapes propose unto my self those to whom either
fortune or their own error does transport and torment. And these nearer, who so slackly-
and incuriously receive their good fortune. They are men which indeed pass their time;
they overpasse the present and that which they possesse, thereby to serve their hopes with
shadowes and vain images, which fancy sets before them,
Morte oblita quales fama est volitare figuras
Aut quæ sopitos deludunt somnia sensus. -- Virg. Æn. x. 641.
Such walking shapes we say, when men are dead,
Dreames, whereby sleeping senses are misse-led.
which hasten and prolong their flight according as they are followed. The fruit and scope
of their pursuit is to pursue. As Alexander said, ’The end of his Travell was to travell.’
Nil actum credens cum quid superesset agendum. -- Lucan. ii. 656.
Who thought that nought was done
When ought remain’d undone.
As for me, then, I love my [life] and cherish it, such as it has pleased God to graunt it
us. I desire not he should speak of the necessity of eating and drinking. And I would
think to offend no less excusably, in desiring it should have it double. Sapiens
divitiarum naturalium quæsitor acerrimus: (Sen. Epist. cxix.) “A wise man is a most eager
and earnest searcher of those things that are natural.” Not that we should sustain ourselves by only putting a little of that drug into our mouth wherewith Epimenedes was
wont to allay hunger, and yet maintained himself. Nor that we should insensibly produce
children at our fingers ends or at our heels, but rather (speaking with reverence) that
we might with pleasure and voluptuousness produce them both at our heels and fingers
ends. Nor that the body should be void of desire and without tickling delight. They are
ungrateful and impious complaints. I cheerfully and thankfully, and with a good heart,
accept what nature has created for me, and am therewith well pleased and am proud of it.
Great wrong is offered unto that great and all-puissant Giver, to refuse his gift, which is so
absolutely good; and disanull or disfigure the same, since he made perfectly good. Omnia
quæ secundum naturam sunt, estimatione digna sunt: (Cic. Fin. Bon. iii.) “All things that
are according to nature, are worthy to be esteemed.” Of Philosophy’s opinions I more
willingly embrace those which are the most solid, and that is to say such as are most
humane and most ours. My discourses are suitable to my manner—slow and humble. She
then brings forth a child well-pleasing me, when she betakes herself to her Quiddities
and Ergoes, that it is a barbarous alliance to marry what is divine with that which is
terrestrial; wed reasonable with unreasonable; combine severe with indulgent, and
couple honest with unhonest; that voluptuousness is a brutal quality, unworthy the taste
of a wiseman. The only pleasure he draws from the enjoying of a fair young bride is
the delight of his conscience, by performing an action according unto order, As to put on
his boots for a profitable riding. Oh that his followers had no more right, or sinews, or
pith, or juice, at the dismaidening of their wives than they have in his Lesson. It is not
that which Socrates, both his and our Master, says. He valueth rightly as he ought
corporall voluptuousness; but he preferreth that of the mind, as having more force, more
constancy, facility, variety and dignity. This according to him goeth nothing alone, he [is]
not so phantasticall, but only first. For him temperance is a moderatrix, and not an
adversary of sensualities. Nature is a gentle guide, yet not more gentle then prudent and
just. Intrandum est in rerum naturam, et penitus quid ea postulet, pervidendum: (Ibid. v.)
’We must enter into the nature of things, and throughly see what she inwardly requiers.’
I quest after her track; we have confounded her with artificiall traces. And that
Academicall and Peripateticall summum bonum or sovereign felicity, which is to live
according to her rules by this reason becomes difficult to be limited, and hard to be
expounded. And that of the Stoics, first cousin to the other, which is to yield unto
nature. Is it not an error to esteeme some actions less worthy forasmuch as they are
necessary? Yet shall they never remove out of my head that it is not a most convenient
marriage to wed Pleasure unto Necessity. With which (says an ancient Writer) the Gods
do ever complot and consent. To what end do we by a divorce dismember a frame
contented with so mutual, coherent, and brotherly correspondency. Contrariwise, let us
repair and renew the same by interchangable offices, that the spirit may awake and
quicken the dull heaviness of the body, and the body stay the lightness of the spirit, and
settle and fix the same. Qui velut summum bonum, laudat animæ naturam, et tanquam
malum, naturam carnis accusat, profecto et animam carnaliter appetit, et carnem
incarnaliter fugit; quoniam id vanitate sentit humana, non veritate divina: (Aug. Verb.
Apostol. ser. xiii. c. 6.) “He that praises the nature of the soul as his principal good, and
accuses nature of the flesh as evil, assuredly he both carnally affects the soul and
carnally eschews the flesh, since he is of this mind not by divine verity, but humane
vanity.” There is no part or parcel unworthy of our care in that present which God has
bestowed upon us. We are accountable even for the least hair of it. And it is no
commission for fashion’s sake for any man to direct man according to his condition it is
express, natural, and principal: And the Creator has seriously and severely given the
same unto us. Only authority is of force with men of common reach and understanding,
and is of more weight in a strange language. But here let us charge again. Stultitiæ
proprium quis non dixerit, ignave et contumaciter facere quæ facienda sunt; et alio
corpus impellere, alio animum, distrahique inter diversissimos motus? “Who will not call
it a property of folly to do slothfully and fro-wardly what is to be done, and one way to
drive the body and an other way the mind, and himself to be distracted into most diverse
motions?” Which the better to see let such a man one day tell you the ammusements and
imaginations which he puts into his own head, and for which he diverteth his thoughts
for a good repast, and bewaileth the hour he employeth in feeding himself; you shall
find there is nothing so wallowish in all the messes of your table as is that goodly
entertainement of the mind (It were often better for us to be sound a sleepe, than awake
unto that we do), and you shall find that his discourses and intentions are not worth your
meanest dish. Suppose they were the entrancings of Archimedes himself, and what of that?
I here touch not nor do I blend with that rabble or raskality of men, as we are, nor with
that vanity of desires and cogitations which divert us, only those venerable mindes which
through a fervency of devotion and earnestnesse of religion, elevated to a constant and
consciencious meditation of heavenly-devine things, and which, by the violence of a
lively and virtue of a vehement hope, preoccupating the use of eternall soul-saving
nourishment; the finall end, only stay and last scope of Christian desires; the only
constant delight and incorruptible pleasure; disdaine to rely on our necessitous, fleeting,
and ambiguous commodities; and easily resigne the care and use of sensuall and temporall
feeding unto the body. It is a priviledged study. Super-celestiall opinions and under-
terrestriall manners are things that amongst us I have ever seen to be of singular accord.
Æsope, that famous man, saw his Master pisse as he was walking; What (said he) must
we not, etc., when we are running? Let us husband time as well as we can. Yet shall we
employ much of it both idely and ill. As if our mind had not other hours enough to do
her business without disassociating herself from the body in that little space which she
needeth for her necessity. They will be exempted from them and escape man. It is meere
folly; insteade of transforming themselves into Angels, they trans-change themselves into
beastes; in lieu of advancing, they abase themselves. Such transcending humors affright
me as much as steepy, high, and inaccessible places. And I find nothing so hard to be
disgested in Socrates his life as his extasies and communication with Dæmones. Nothing
so humane in Plato as that which they say he is called divine. And of our sciences those
which are raised and extolled for the highest seem to me the most basest and terrestriall. I
find nothing so humble and mortal in Alexanders life as his concepts about his
immortalization. Philotas by his answer quipped at him very pleasantly and wittily. He
had by a letter congratulated with him, and rejoiced that the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon
had placed him amongst the Gods; to whom he answered, that in respect and consideration
of him he was very glad; but yet there was some cause those men should be pitied that
were to live with a man and obey him who out-went others, and would not be contented
with the state and condition of mortal man.
-----Diis te minorem quod geris, imperas. -- Hor. Car. iii. Od. vi.
Since you less then the Gods
Bear’st you, you rul’st with ods.

The quaint inscription wherewith the Athenians honored the coming of Pompey into
their City agrees well and is conformable to my meaning.
D’autant es tu Dieu comme
Tu te recognois homme. -- Plut. vit. Pomp.
So far a God you mayest accompted be
As you a man doest reacknowledge you.
It is an absolute perfection, and as it were divine for a man to know how to enjoy his
being loyally. We seek for other conditions because we understand not the use of ours,
and go out of ourselves forasmuch as we know not what abiding there is. We may long
enough get upon stilts, for be we upon them, yet must we go with our own legs. And
sit we upon the highest throne of the World, yet sit we upon our own tail. The best and
most commendable lives and best pleasing men are (in my conceit) those which with
order are fitted, and with decorum are ranged to the common mould and humane model,
but without wonder or extravagancy. Now has old age need to be handled more tenderly.
Let us recommend it unto that God who is the protector of Health and fountain of all
wisdom, but blithe and social:
Frui paratis et valido mihi
Latoe dones; et precor integra
Cum mente, nec turpem senectam
Degere, nec cithara carentem. -- Hor. Car. i. Od. xxxi. 17.
Apollo graunt enjoy the health I may
That I have got, and with sound mind, I pray;
Nor that I may with shame spend my old years,
Nor wanting music to delight mine ears.

